Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Energy Reports
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/egyr
Review article
Smart grids: A comprehensive survey of challenges, industry applications,
and future trends
Jadyn Powella, Alex McCafferty-Leroux b a Western University, 1151 Richmond St, N6A 3K7, London, Canada
b McMaster University, 1280 Main St. W, L8S 4L7, Hamilton, Canada
, Waleed Hilal b , S. Andrew Gadsden b ,
∗
A R T I C L E I N F O
A B S T R A C T
Keywords:
Smart grids
Cybersecurity
Renewable energy integration
Energy storage
Interoperability
Machine learning
With the increasing energy demands of the 21st century, there is a clear need for developing a more
sustainable method of energy generation, distribution, and transmission. Modern power grid infrastructures
are currently managing these aspects, though their outdated configuration results in rigid and inefficient
operation. The emerging technology of Smart Grids offers innovative solutions to these issues, utilizing
advanced communication and computation structures. Through the integration of a bidirectional power and
information flow, smart systems, and renewable energy sources, Smart Grids are the next generation of power
grids, enabling cooperativity, automation, and efficiency. Even on small scales, the proposed benefits of the
Smart Grid are substantial in maintaining sustainable energy use with growing demands. In this survey, we
provide a comprehensive overview of Smart Grid technology, specifically focusing on the challenges presented
by cybersecurity, interoperability, and renewable energy integration. These aspects were determined to be the
most prevalent issues facing the advancement of Smart Grids, specifically for global application. We discuss
these challenges thoroughly, determining the difficulties they induce and proposed solutions presented in
literature. As such, this survey is intended to be a reference for other researchers, providing state-of-the-
art approaches to solving these problems, as well as offering insights on ongoing issues and future endeavors.
Additionally, we will highlight the current state of Smart Grid implementation through an analysis of programs
and research being conducted by academic institutions, industry, and government.
1. Introduction
The electrical grid, pivotal in producing, transmitting, and distribut-
ing electricity, is instrumental to economic and social development.
Its central role lies in spatially allocating electricity (Office of Electric
Transmission and Distribution, 2003; Energy Sector Control Systems
Working Group, 2011; Department of Energy and Climate Change,
2009; Electricity Advisory Committee, 2008a). Despite being lauded as
one of the paramount engineering feats of the 20th century (Colson
et al., 2012) and heavily relied upon by consumers, current electricity
delivery methods are rigid.
Today’s delivery systems, composed of various transmission and
distribution networks, supply consumers with electricity from central-
ized generation stations (Gelazanskas and Gamage, 2013). Yet, this
expansive, intricate system finds it challenging to meet the escalating
demand for real-time, reconfigurable, and adaptive functionalities. Its
continuous operation largely hinges on human intervention, owing to
the absence of automated self-correcting features crucial in today’s
dynamic environments (Cunjiang et al., 2012). While there are ongoing
incremental improvements in these systems, a thorough revamp of the
infrastructure is indispensable to cater to the soaring demand for smart
systems.
Enter the smart grid (SG), heralding a paradigm shift in electricity
delivery. The SG integrates modern telecommunication and sensing
technologies to enhance electricity delivery strategies (Blumsack and
Fernandez, 2012). Unlike the traditional unidirectional grid, the SG
introduces a bidirectional framework, facilitating a bidirectional flow
of information and electricity (Fang et al., 2012). This evolution fosters
increased customer engagement, enables the grid to operate more col-
laboratively, improves monitoring, enhances automation, and ensures
widespread access to information (Blumsack and Fernandez, 2012).
With the SG’s integration of advanced monitoring and sensing tech-
nologies, less human intervention is required. The grid evolves to
possess self-healing abilities, enhanced demand response, and smoother
renewable source integration. These advancements not only offer con-
sumers and providers more flexibility but also open the doors to
∗ Corresponding author.
(S. Andrew Gadsden).
E-mail addresses: jpowel45@uwo.ca (J. Powell), mccaffea@mcmaster.ca (A. McCafferty-Leroux), hilalw@mcmaster.ca (W. Hilal), gadsden@mcmaster.ca
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2024.05.051
Received 23 January 2024; Received in revised form 9 May 2024; Accepted 20 May 2024Available online 28 May 2024
2352-4847/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc/4.0/).
J. Powell et al.
technologies currently incompatible with the existing grid infrastruc-
ture (Hledik, 2009).
In light of the pressing need to combat climate change, the SG offers
a promising avenue to slash carbon emissions in the power sector and
seamlessly integrate renewable energy. Current power systems may be-
come untenable, especially with energy production demands projected
to soar by 70% by 2040. This spike underscores the urgency to develop
an efficient, sustainable power system to meet future challenges (World
Energy Outlook, 2016).
The objective of this paper is to furnish a comprehensive overview
of the latest research on SGs, offering clear analyses of diverse research
trajectories. We aim to collate recent contributions, chart advancements
in the domain, and shed light on the SG’s potential trajectory. The
remainder of the survey unfolds as follows: Section 2 delves into related
surveys in the domain. Section 3 elucidates the background of the
SG. Section 4 tackles cybersecurity issues, threat classifications, and
proposed solutions. Section 5 discusses the imperatives and challenges
of interoperability, while Section 6 delves into renewable energy in-
tegration. Section 7 provides insights on SG industry applications and
future trends, and Section 8 concludes the discourse.
2. Related publications
The evolution of SG research has seen numerous contributions span-
ning various areas. Over time, there has been a broad range of research
literature published on SGs, including papers focused on broad-scale
information, technologies, and architecture.
One of the first few survey papers provided about SG was pub-
lished in 2010 and provides an overview of SG, including its drivers,
evolution, standards, and research, development, and demonstration
(RD&D) (Farhangi, 2010). Since then, several more survey papers have
been published. This 2016 publication from Colak et al. (2016) provides
a more updated overview of various SG components, such as cyberse-
curity, renewable energy integration (REI), and interoperability. More
recent papers continued to be published, such as the following from
2020 (Dileep, 2020). This research provides an in-depth background
of the SG’s definition, architecture, functions, and possibilities. In a
recent 2022 paper, Judge et al. provides a modern overview of the
SG’s performance and impacts and details the integration of renewable
energy sources (Judge et al., 2022).
There are also other publications that thoroughly investigate a
few of components of the SG. A 2020 paper provided a compre-
hensive overview of REI (Alotaibi et al., 2020), as well as Kawoosa
and Prashar’s work from 2021, which provides a comprehensive re-
view of cybersecurity including classifications, threats, and proposed
solutions (Kawoosa and Prashar, 2021).
Of the existing survey papers, two prominent limitations were
present. Either the content was overly restrictive, or overly inclusive.
The papers were very detailed about a small component of SG, or
they provided a general overview of SG. Typically, these works do not
present enough detail about the SG. Another significant issue is that
few publications highlight the current state of implementation of SG
worldwide. Regardless of various shortcomings, each paper presents
valuable information for readers.
In this survey, the work of previous authors is extended, providing
a thorough overview of SGs, their purpose, and benefits. We also
address the limitations of the previously mentioned surveys, such as
the inclusion of updated technologies, detailed but limited content,
and emphasis on the overall state of the SG implementations. This
paper also serves as an updated, comprehensive review of essential
components of the SG, as well as its current state of implementation.
This will be achieved by defining the SG, detailing its importance, and
exploring its main components. The main components of the SG are also
identified and explained, as well as the challenges and most updated
proposed solutions. The current state of the SG is also highlighted,
presenting some of the main countries’ and continents’ projects and the
progress of implementing the SG.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
3. Introduction to smart grid
3.1. Traditional electrical grids
The current electric power grid is a complex, physical infrastructure
used for the distribution of electricity (Moretti et al., 2017). There are
three main systems within the electric grid, including the electrical gen-
eration, transmission, and distribution systems. This integrated network
is used to deliver electricity to consumers and includes the power plants
used to generate electricity, the substations used to transform voltages,
and the distribution facilities to deliver electricity from substations to
consumers.
The physical infrastructure lacks automation, relying heavily on
employee services for maintenance and repairs and continuously proves
unsustainable as future technologies continue to develop, such as ad-
vanced metering, and remote monitoring. Despite being widely relied
on, the current electric grid has a significant number of uncertainties,
including aging infrastructure, and poor resiliency to disturbances. It is
also nonlinear and incredibly complex (Khurana et al., 2010).
With the increased demand for more climate sustainable actions,
the integration of renewable energy sources into the power grid is a
necessary step. Unfortunately, this step will add even more complexity
to the already complex system and present more challenges to several
controllers at all levels of the power grid (Khurana et al., 2010). This
clearly indicates that a more sustainable alternative to the electric grid,
or heavy augmentation of it, will be necessary in the near future.
3.2. Smart systems
Smart systems are used to embed technology into already existing
systems and processes to increase their efficiency and automation. They
use incorporated functions such as sensing, actuating and controls to
analyze situations making predictive and adaptive decisions.
Smart systems are able to learn, reason, control, and perceive
themselves and their environment (Romero et al., 2020). They are
able to self-organize and provide communication between various el-
ements throughout the system (Romero et al., 2020). They can contin-
uously perceive their surrounding environment, allowing the systems
to update their internal knowledge, which is used for effective de-
cision making (Romero et al., 2020). Through reasoning capabilities,
smart systems are adaptable to both new states and objectives of their
environment (Romero Aquino, 2021).
Smart systems have various applications and advantages, including
improved security, interconnectivity, and improved functionality. The
integration of smart systems to the current electrical grid will allow for
solutions to various rising issues and for continued modernization in
the future.
3.3. Smart grid
The SG is a new, modern grid combining smart systems with the
current electrical grid. It uses a bidirectional flow of both information
and electricity, creating an automated delivery mode (Hentea, 2021). It
aims at improving energy efficiency and demand-side management, and
reinforcing reliable grid protection through self-healing methods (Fang
et al., 2012). It combines multiple bidirectional smart devices (e.g. sen-
sors, actuators, and meters) which will provide real-time monitoring,
balancing, and control at all times with high accuracy (Song et al.,
2017a; Romero et al., 2020).
While the traditional grid can only distribute electrical power, the
SG is able to make, communicate, and store its decisions, augmenting
the current grid and enabling cooperative, responsive, and organic
functions (Kitsios et al., 2017). It incorporates many unique techno-
logical features and increased monitoring, which makes the behavior of
both the consumers and suppliers more apparent and therefore easier to
understand (Venayagamoorthy, 2009). Fig. 1 above outlines the basic
structure of a SG, showing the bidirectional flow of information and
sequential power distribution (Tran et al., 2013).
5761
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Fig. 1. Basic SG structure.
Source: Adapted from Tran
et al. (2013).
3.3.1. Control and monitoring
The grid is operated, monitored, and controlled using Information
and Communications Technologies (ICT). ICT enables energy compa-
nies to control the power demand, allowing for reliable and efficient
power delivery at a reduced cost (Rajfallovska, 2016). Based on in-
formation received from consumers, the SG prepares and executes
streamlined operations using bidirectional communications between
electric power companies and consumers (Camacho et al., 2011). We
can consider SG as being intelligent as it applies protection systems
of the central/grid control, grid computing, complete diagnostic mon-
itoring of transmission equipment, and self-healing power system net-
works using distributed computer agent (Paul et al., 2014). By using a
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system, these tech-
nologies can be facilitated (Paul et al., 2014). SCADA is a specialized
control system used to remotely monitor, control, and manage critical
processes and equipment. SCADA systems collect data from sensors
and instruments in the field, transmit and process the data. They
allow operators to make informed decisions, initiate control actions,
and respond to alarms and faults through the providing of real-time
information about the status of processes and equipment.
3.3.2. Smart meters
Smart meters are another unique component of the SG which en-
ables advanced metering infrastructure (AMI). This allows for more
data to be collected and in a much more effective manner. Smart meters
collect data every minute, whereas old metering data was recorded
hourly or monthly. To improve metered grid data (i.e. voltage and
current phasors) accuracy at more frequent sampling intervals, phasor
measurement units (PMUs) can be applied. The PMU’s implementation
into SG has been extensively researched (see Paramo et al. (2022)),
significantly contributing to the SG’s advancements in the control,
estimation, and security of power grids. As a comparison, modern PMUs
collect up to 60 data points per second, whereas the current SCADA
systems collect a single data point every 1 to 2 s (Khurana et al., 2010).
Applying the AMI in the power distribution system and the PMU in the
power transmission grid will provide the power grid a much more in-
depth look at grid performance compared to the data available from
SCADA technology (Khurana et al., 2010). Incorporating the use of
additional smart technology in consumer’s homes will expand control
and monitoring of multiple devices connected to the power grid.
The integration of AMI implies a variety of advantages for SG
technology. Considering demand response, AMI can enhance the ap-
plication of such programs, monitoring real-time energy consumption.
Demand response in the context of power grids is the incentivizing of
consumers to reduce energy consumption across the grid to manage
resources. As such, utility companies can notify customers to decrease
their consumption when the energy demand is relatively high, pre-
venting power-outages and balancing loads. Energy efficiency is also
considered with AMI, where distributed generation can be enabled.
Data collected from renewable energy sources (solar, wind, etc.) can
be analyzed to manage resources effectively, as the power generated
from these sources by the distributor or consumer is typically variable.
Again, this can be taken advantage of to better prevent against out-
ages and imbalance, while also harnessing a deeper understanding of
irregular sources. Technology involved in integrating these resources is
further discussed in Section 6.
Consumer engagement is an additional implication of AMI inte-
gration, where remote management and enhanced customer service
can be expected. AMI collects significantly more data than current
frameworks, which allows customers to manage usage effectively and
for distributors to provide guidance on how their consumption can
be more efficient. Two-way communication facilitates this process.
Improved utility management is also suggested, where theft recognition
and remote enabling capabilities allow distributors further control over
energy. Remote enabling (or disabling) removes the physicality from
the process, being able to quickly control energy supply to customers
who avoid bill payments or are no longer residing at their previous
location. The detection of energy theft is also facilitated with AMI,
where consumption data can be analyzed to formulate patterns and
therefore recognize anomalies. In theft, this would be indicated by no
usage, where past data suggests that the consumer has regular usage at
a specified time.
3.3.3. Anticipated benefits of smart grid
There are many anticipated benefits from the integration of SGs,
originally listed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) (NIST, 2010), and subsequently redefined by Fang et al. (2012).
The benefits are categorized and described below.
• Grid Reliability and Quality Improvement
1. Improving the quality and reliability of power transmission
2. Improving resilience to grid related disruptions (e.g. power
and data)
3. Presenting opportunities for improving grid security
• Grid Efficiency and Optimization
1. Optimizing the utilization of facilities, thereby avoiding
back-up power plant construction
5762
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Fig. 2. SG classification of cybersecurity attacks.
2. Enhancing the capacity and efficiency of existing power
networks
3. Automating maintenance and various operations
• Grid Modernization and Adaptation
1. Enabling self-healing reactions and predictive maintenance
when subjected to disturbances
2. Advancing the renewable energy source deployment
3. Distributed power source accommodation
4. Standardizing new energy storage alternatives and the
transition to plug-in electric vehicles
• Environmental Sustainability and Efficiency
1. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions through electric vehi-
cle normalization and utilizing modern
power sources
2. Minimizing inefficient generation during periods of peak-
usage, and therefore oil consumption
• Market and Consumer-Related Enhancements
1. Increasing consumer choice
2. Enabling the introduction of new markets, services, and
products
The benefits as described by NIST in NIST (2010) offer numerous
benefits to the individuals, countries, and companies that adopt SGs.
With environmental, security, and operational benefits augmented into
the power grid, consumers can also expect to see an increased amount
of choices offered to consumers considering their energy consumption,
as well as new markets, services, and products. An example that applies
to the United States (US) and many other countries, the implementation
of SGs will be important for reducing the dependence on foreign oil and
increasing clean energy production (NIST, 2010), therefore creating
jobs and new commodities, manufacturing methods, etc. from that
research. The first four major points on the list above are directly
related to the following three sections of this survey, being cyber-
security, interoperability, and REI in SGs. Focusing research efforts
on implementing these aspects into the power grid will continue to
result in achieving the outlined benefits, vital to a sustainable living
and future. It was remarked by the Department of Energy (DOE) in
2008 (Electricity Advisory Committee, 2008b) that if modern power
grids were 5% more efficient than they currently are, the energy savings
would be equal to the effect of eliminating the emissions of 53 million
automobiles.
4. Cybersecurity
As electrical grids become more sophisticated, the number of risks
they are vulnerable to increases (Berl et al., 2013). Some risks and
threats are linked to the incorporation of digital communications,
including cybersecurity and data privacy, reliability, and technical
failures, while others come from changes in how power companies and
their customers interact (Khurana et al., 2010).
The SG allows for close interaction at all levels of the power
distribution, consumption, generation, and transmission systems. This
means there is a high degree of coordination and communication
amongst the various levels of the power grid system. This close inter-
action presents many more opportunities and the increased possibility
of cyberattacks and cascade failures, which could affect all of the
aforementioned systems (Khurana et al., 2010). This could lead to
potentially catastrophic consequences, including energy market chaos,
SG IT infrastructure failures, power blackouts, dangers to human safety,
and damaged customer devices (Khurana et al., 2010). Less severe
but more frequent consequences are also a possibility, such as small-
scale outages (Khurana et al., 2010). The electric grid is essential, so
it is necessary to devise and implement defense systems capable of
supervising mass amounts of data, evaluating system status, identifying
failures, predicting threats, and suggesting corrections (Khurana et al.,
2010).
SG is considered by Gunduz and Das (2020) to be one of the
most consequential applications of the Internet of Things (IoT). An IoT
network enables devices the ability to communicate either directly, or
through an internet gateway (Gunduz and Das, 2018, 2020). IoT-based
SG systems are large, critical infrastructures, with complex architec-
tures which are vulnerable to cyberattacks. Utilizing IoT applications
is convenient for SGs, however, it poses several vulnerabilities. Con-
sidering that the monitoring and control operations are performed
on internet-based protocols, the SG could potentially be appealing as
critical infrastructure to malicious entities (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
Due to this appeal, it is necessary to examine weaknesses in an SG
component’s security systems, as well as potential cybersecurity threats
within its infrastructure (Gunduz and Das, 2020; Gündüz and Das,
2018a).
4.1. Classifying types of attacks
Due to the enormity of the system, both in terms of geographical
distribution and complex infrastructure, identifying and classifying
each individual possible attack would be nearly impossible. Instead,
three principal security objectives are defined and must be incorporated
into SG. These three security objectives are confidentiality, integrity,
and availability, also known as the CIA triad, as seen in Fig. 2. The CIA
triad is essential for both the management, operation, and protection of
the system and communication infrastructures (Ardagna et al., 2021).
Cyberattacks in SGs target no less than one of the CIA triad ob-
jectives and are conducted to exploit information to use to attackers’
advantage or to harm others (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Some attacks
are coordinated to exploit various components of the SG and to launch
simultaneous attacks. The most challenging attack to defend against, a
coordinated attack can surpass common defenses, requiring multilayer
security solutions with robust approaches (Gunduz and Das, 2020),
such as those analyzed in Chen et al. (2021), Tian et al. (2019),
Zhang et al. (2022). These types of attacks target all the components,
requirements, and security objectives in an SG (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
Cyberattacks such as these can occur at numerous communication
layers within SG (Wang and Lu, 2013). These layers, the network and
transport layer, the MAC layer, and the physical layer are all affected
differently by various types of attacks (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Iden-
tifying the types of cybersecurity threats enables effective and appro-
priate countermeasures (Gündüz and Das, 2018b). Security procedures
achieved by investigating the cybersecurity requirements according
to attack types and the communication layers affected will produce
effective solutions for the security of the SG (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
5763
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Table 1
Types and descriptions of confidentiality attacks.
Type of Attack Description of Attack
Password Attacks Eavesdropping Attacks Masquerade Attacks Side Channel Attacks Sniffing Attacks Attempts to gain access by using an authorized person’s password
Intercept wireless transmission on LAN, sniff IP packets in SG
networks, or eavesdrop on messages shared between nodes
Attackers pretend to have authorization in order to access privileges
Performed to obtain cryptographic keys
Performed to gain access to TCP/IP packets or PMU contents
transmitted over a network
4.2. Confidentiality attacks
Confidentiality attacks do not intend to change transmitted infor-
mation over power networks. Instead, these attacks are used with
the intention of achieving access to information by unauthorized par-
ties (Rawat and Bajracharya, 2015). This information includes the
customer’s account details and power usage. If malevolent entities
were to obtain customer account information, they may be able to
commit identity theft, privacy invasions, phishing, and selling customer
information. If they obtain power usage information, they may be able
to commit billing fraud and energy theft.
Confidentiality attacks are typically considered to have minimal
effects on the functionality of the communications in SG. However,
the importance of customer privacy has gained more attention as more
progress is made with the SG (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Table 1 below
describes various attacks described in this paper that target confiden-
tiality, such as password attacks, masquerade attacks, and side-channel
attacks.
Smart meters measure and store large quantities of data and au-
tonomously transport it to providers, consumers, and utility companies.
If attackers intercept the private information of the consumer, it can be
abused in many ways (Gunduz and Das, 2020). For example, it can be
used to learn what appliances they use, keep track of their lifestyle, and
by studying their power usage, determine whether they are at home or
not (Gunduz and Das, 2020; Baig and Amoudi, 2013). It may even be
possible to differentiate between various activities, such as watching
television or sleeping (Khurana et al., 2010). Power usage analysis of
businesses may also be able to indicate attackers’ changes in business
operations. Confidentiality is a leading issue for business owners and
users (Rawat and Bajracharya, 2015).
Password attacks have various methods, such as password guessing
or sniffing, social engineering, and dictionary attacks (Gunduz and
Das, 2020). Social engineering is an especially popular method as it
is used to penetrate systems through utilizing social skills, as opposed
to technical attacks (Gunduz and Das, 2020; Yang et al., 2011).
Eavesdropping attacks are a passive attack type, which damages
data confidentiality (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Eavesdropping attacks in-
tercept wireless transmissions on local area networks (LAN), messages
shared between communication network nodes, or sniff IP packets in
SG networks (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
When masquerading attacks occur, attackers pretend to have au-
thorization to access privileges (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Common
applications of these types of attacks are identity spoofing and imper-
sonation (Delgado-Gomes et al., 2015). Identity spoofing attacks enable
attackers to imitate an authorized individual, without the possession of
a user’s password (Yang et al., 2011; Baig and Amoudi, 2013). Such at-
tacks include Man-in-the-Middle (MITM), message replay, and network
spoofing. Spoofing attacks involve modifications to the parameters of
SG devices and can include procedures of Media Access Control (MAC),
IP, and address resolution protocol (ARP) spoofing (Gunduz and Das,
2020).
Side-channel attacks are performed to obtain cryptographic keys
(Gunduz and Das, 2020). Common types of this attack include tim-
ing attacks, power analysis attacks, and electromagnetic analysis at-
tacks (Baig and Amoudi, 2013; Yang et al., 2011). Devices such as smart
meters and home appliances are especially vulnerable to these attacks
and can result in violations of privacy, information about usage, and
administrative access (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
Using various tools for packet analysis or sniffing, an attacker
can obtain TCP/IP packets of smart meters sent over the network or
PMU contents (Gunduz and Das, 2020). TCP/IP packets, PMU, and
smart meters are the primary targets of sniffing attacks, and lacking
encryption, important information can be detected or collected by
attackers (Gunduz and Das, 2020). The current practice for smart
meters is the implementation of an X.509 certificate, which is a stan-
dard for device identification and cryptographic session establishment
over the internet (Khurana et al., 2010). However, the cryptographic
keys are static for each device, meaning that new methods should
include a key management solution that can update cryptographic keys
periodically (Khurana et al., 2010).
4.3. Integrity attacks
Attacks that target integrity aim to modify and/or disrupt the
exchange of data within SG (Wang and Lu, 2013), which can lead
to safety issues involving equipment or people (Yan et al., 2012).
Integrity attacks focus on the content of the originally sent data
(e.g. billing data, account data, control commands, sensor and voltage
values, operating status of devices, etc.), and once intercepted are
modified, reordered, or delayed (Gunduz and Das, 2020; Khelifa and
Abla, 2015; Tan et al., 2017). Data integrity checks are often utilized
to mitigate these attacks since this information is both personal to
customers and valuable to companies. There are also fault-tolerant
methods against data integrity attacks, as discussed in Jadidi et al.
(2023), Liu et al. (2020). Though they are generally considered to be
not as ‘‘brute-force’’ as other methods, attacks targeting data integrity
are more sophisticated than attacks, targeting other categories of the
CIA triad (Wang and Lu, 2013). Table 2 below describes various attacks
described in this paper that target integrity.
The false data injection (FDI) attack is emerging as one of the
most dangerous types of cyberattacks for SG. FDI occurs when bad
data is injected into neighborhood area network (NAN) measurements
or smart meters, targeting SG infrastructure (Gunduz and Das, 2020;
Peng et al., 2019). The objective of the FDI is to damage the in-
tegrity of both monitoring and measurement sub-systems, resulting in
cascaded poor judgment throughout the SG network (Rizzetti et al.,
2015). Monitoring measurement manipulation would result in incorrect
evaluations of the operating state of the system and therefore the
destabilization of the SG, and to imprecise operational actions, such as
pricing, planning, self-healing, or general flexibility (Gunduz and Das,
2020). Oozeer and Haykin comment that conventional malicious data
detection and state estimation techniques have been applied to detect
bad data in energy system state estimators and reduce observation
errors (Oozeer and Haykin, 2019a). They are unable to, however, detect
FDI attacks (Oozeer and Haykin, 2019a), leading to the development
of more advanced or intelligent methods. If it is assumed that an
attacker has already compromised one or more meters, Liu et al. (2011)
suggested that the attacker is able to inject counterfeit data into the
SCADA center, simultaneously passing the data integrity check utilized
5764
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Table 2
Types and descriptions of integrity attacks.
Type of Attack Description of Attack
FDI Attacks MITM Attacks SQL Injection Attacks Replay/Playback Attacks Time Synchronization Attacks Spoofing Attacks Incorrect data is introduced into NAN measurements or smart
meters. They damage the integrity of monitoring and measurement
subsystems, resulting in cascaded poor judgment in the SG network
Performed to damage the transmission between the smart meter
and data concentrator units
Transforms databases through the injection of script commands or
malicious queries into the database, resulting in command over the
system, modified or erased data, and additional manipulated data
Retransmits or delays messages after acquiring them through
masquerading attacks. Initiated so attackers can direct energy to
different locations and cause physical damage to the system
Targets timing data in SG, mainly PMU and WAPMC. TSA may
generate incorrect location errors, triggering a false alarm
indicating an issue, which can cause communication line
interruptions, resulting in cascading faults
An attacker can impersonate other devices by exploiting the
openness of the address fields on the MAC layer, enabling the
ability to send false information
in the current state estimation process (Wang and Lu, 2013). The load
redistribution attack (Yuan et al., 2011) is a variation of FDI, where
only line power flow and load bus injection measurements and are
influenced in the attack (Wang and Lu, 2013). Research in Yuan et al.
(2011) demonstrates that these attacks can be considered as realistic
FDI attacks, having constrained access to specific meters (Wang and
Lu, 2013).
Data integrity attacks exploit vulnerabilities to corrupt processes
in SG (Gunduz and Das, 2020; Bedi et al., 2018). Common methods
of such attacks include MITM attacks and Structured Query Language
(SQL) injections, each having their own variations. For MITM, these
include compromised certificates, modified packet source/destinations,
and route table poisoning (Gunduz and Das, 2020; Bedi et al., 2018).
In SG applications, the data concentrator unit is connected to home
area network (HAN) smart meters. Utilizing data modification attack
methods (typically MITM), attackers are able to damage the data
transmission between these two sub-systems, negatively influencing the
accountability of the system and the CIA triad (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
SQL injection attacks are intended to inject script instructions and
alter databases (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Smart meters continuously
forward power consumption data to secure databases for both utilities
and users, a prime target for these types of attacks. Malicious queries
are injected into the database in order to add manipulated data, modify
or delete existing data, or gain authority over the system (Gunduz and
Das, 2020). These injections can result in disruptions to SG functions
and even eventually result in blackout. Unless the queries formed by the
database users are sufficiently validated before insertion, SQL injection
can occur (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
Replay or playback attacks are designed to direct energy to a sepa-
rate location in the grid and cause physical harm to the system (Gunduz
and Das, 2020; Rawat and Bajracharya, 2015). Similar to previously
discussed attacks, there are a variety of types of replay attacks, in-
cluding covert attacks, which are their closed-loop versions (Sanjab
et al., 2016) existing in short lengths of time and having a particular
frequency (Ma et al., 2023). Replay attacks are likely to cause extremely
serious effects on system stability, on global or localized scales across
the SG, with losses being accumulated from either the delay itself or the
attack signal. These attacks can be counteracted on authentication or
fault detection/estimation levels. Numerous efforts have been proposed
to counteract these attacks and preserve stability, such as in Abdelwa-
hab et al.’s active detection using watermarking (Abdelwahab et al.,
2020) and Pavithra and Rekha’s fault detection and fast encryption
algorithm (Pavithra and Rekha, 2021). Replay attacks occur when
an entity acting as the primary source obtains the network traffic,
and forwards the data to a destination. Following the acquisition of
data through masquerading attacks, replay attacks are intended to
delay or re-transmit messages (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Data can be
injected into the system by attackers without significant modifications
to measurable outputs, as well as target unencrypted sensors to initiate
the replay attacks. Monitoring sensor outputs, attackers repeat them
while injecting their attack signal (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Not only
are false control signals are injected into the network in replay attacks,
but attackers are able to analyze and access the data that is transmitted
between devices and meters to obtain the target’s energy generation
and usage characteristics (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
Time synchronization attacks (TSAs) primarily target timing data
in SG applications (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Event location, fault de-
tection in transmission lines, monitoring voltage stability, and other
applications of the PMU or WAPMC can be influenced by TSA, as these
processes are heavily reliant on exact timing (Baig and Amoudi, 2013).
For instance, global positioning system (GPS) spoofing, a type of TSA,
aims at imitating a GPS signal, providing false times or locations that
are typically used for breaches in defense (Larcom and Liu, 2013).
TSAs may generate incorrect location errors and trigger false alarms,
indicating an issue, as proven by the outcome demonstrated in Zhang
et al. (2013). Gunduz and Das suggest that this false alarm can cause
interruptions in communication lines, possibly triggering cascading
faults in a SG (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
In the SG, spoofing is particularly harmful as it targets two cat-
egories from the CIA triad: availability and integrity. Exploiting the
openness of address fields in a frame on the MAC layer of the SG, an
attacker utilizing spoofing can disguise themselves as other devices to
send false information from Wang and Lu (2013). Premaratne et al.
explain in Premaratne et al. (2010) that in power substation networks,
malicious nodes are able to broadcast forged ARP packets to collapse
connections of all intelligent electronic devices (IEDs) to the substation
gateway node.
4.4. Availability attacks
Attacks targeting availability, referred to as denial-of-service (DoS)
attacks, aim to corrupt, block or delay communications in SGs (Wang
and Lu, 2013; Pandey and Misra, 2016). A DoS attack can impair the
operation of electronic devices and severely degrade a power system’s
communication performance, since it is expected to be consistently
accessible (Wang and Lu, 2013). Attackers flood transmission lines in
the network with large volumes of traffic, which results in the loss of
legitimate data packets and thus not processed (Oozeer and Haykin,
2019a). The SG inherits the vulnerabilities in the TCP/IP stack and
becomes vulnerable to DoS attacks since it applies TCP/IP stack and
5765
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Table 3
Types and descriptions of availability attacks.
Type of Attack Description of Attack
DOS Attacks Physical Layer Attacks MAC Layer Attacks Network and Transport Layer Attacks Application Layer Attacks Performed in an effort to corrupt, block, or delay SG
communications
Intended to crowd wireless communication lines with noise,
blocking connection between users and smart meters
Performed in an attempt to modify the MAC parameters of a device
in order to cause performance degradation of other devices sharing
the same communication channel
These attacks are launched in order to initiate degradation in
end-to-end communication performance
Primarily focused on the transmission bandwidth in routers,
computers, or communication channels, intended to exhaust
computer resources, such as its CPU or I/O bandwidth
IP protocols (Aloul et al., 2012). Since availability is the dominant
security requirement for SG, advanced and effective countermeasures
must be adopted to defend against these types of attacks (Gunduz and
Das, 2020). Table 3 below describes various attacks described in this
paper which target availability.
DoS attacks can occur at various of communication layers within
the SG, all having varying affects and severities (Wang and Lu, 2013),
as described below.
4.4.1. Physical layer attacks
An effective method in launching physical layer attacks, especially
for wireless communications, is with channel jamming, extensively
covered in Strasser et al. (2008), Popper et al. (2009), Liu et al.
(2010). It is quite simple to perform DoS attacks at this layer since
it connection with communication channels is required, rather than
authenticated networks (Wang and Lu, 2013). Wireless jamming is the
primary attack in local area systems, since wireless technology will be
widely used throughout these networks (Mohagheghi et al., 2009; Choi
et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2010; Leon et al., 2007; Pendarakis et al.,
2007). These attacks aim to congest wireless communication lines with
noise-corrupted signals, blocking connection between smart meters and
users (Baig and Amoudi, 2013). Blocking data packages from being
received, and communication channels being continuously seen as busy
by routers result in a significant drop in smart meter performance and
reliability (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Research performed by Lu et al.
(2011) reinforce this, showing that jamming attacks can result in a
variety of impairments to power substation systems, ranging from the
delayed delivery of time-critical messages to total denial-of-service.
Stavrou and Keromytis (2005) detail that an effective approach to these
attacks is dispatching random unauthenticated packets to all wireless
stations in the network, preventing attacks from following. With their
novel spread spectrum approach, they effectively reject DoS attacks of
differing degrees of sophistication and size, without the requirement
of software or hardware augmentation (Stavrou and Keromytis, 2005).
Another method proposed by Lee et al. (2012) offers security on the
physical layer from random frequency hopping, similar to the spread
spectrum approach.
4.4.2. Medium access control (MAC) layer attacks
The MAC layer is responsible for point-to-point communication
(Wang and Lu, 2013). A compromised device could be used by a
malicious entity to deliberately modify the MAC parameters, resulting
in performance degradation of multiple devices that are coupled to
a single communication channel. Therefore, MAC layer complications
often contribute a relatively weaker class of a DoS attack (Wang and
Lu, 2013).
4.4.3. Network and transport layer attacks
Considering the TCP/IP protocol model, the transport and net-
work layers must provide reliability control for information delivery
over multi-hop communication networks (Wang and Lu, 2013). At
these layers, the DoS attacks can result in deteriorated performance
of end-to-end communication (Wang and Lu, 2013), including worm
propagation attacks over the Internet and distributed traffic flood-
ing (Schuba et al., 1997; Yaar et al., 2003; Mirkovic and Reiher,
2004). Several studies have been conducted to assess the impact of
transport- and network-layer DoS attacks on the power system perfor-
mance (Wang and Lu, 2013). Jin et al. (2011) investigated the influence
of a buffer-flooding attack on a DNP3-based SCADA network with
real software and hardware, demonstrating the vulnerability of SCADA
systems to DoS attacks (Wang and Lu, 2013).
4.4.4. Application layer attacks
Lower-layer attacks, which occur on the application layer, mainly
focus on transmission bandwidth in routers, computers, or communi-
cation channels, and are intended to exhaust computer resources, like
CPU or I/O bandwidth (Wang and Lu, 2013). Ranjan et al. (2009)
demonstrate the overwhelming ability of these attacks towards a com-
putationally limited computer, inducing failure from a continuous
stream of computationally heavy demands. The SG is particularly
vulnerable to the DoS attack, since its is comprised of innumerable
computing and communication modules, some equipped with limited
computational abilities (Wang and Lu, 2013).
4.5. Attack defenses
While there are standard protocols to help defend the SG against
more thoroughly researched and understood confidentiality, integrity,
and availability attacks, research into the newer attacks on the SG
have increased, such as FDI attacks. However, sophisticated methods
of defense are being developed as new threats arise in parallel. In
this section we present a variety of methods concerning data and
system protection against cyberattacks, outlining the topic generally
and reviewing the state-of-the-art as found in literature.
4.5.1. Machine learning-based classification and detection
One approach that can be taken in mitigating the impact of harmful
cyberattacks in SG is through detection and classification algorithms.
Generally, the classification and detection of faults in any system is
important to correct the fault, where in learning what these faults
are and how they occur, we can employ self-healing methods. In the
context of SGs, such faults can exist as cyberattacks, threatening the
integrity of consumer data or accounting of distributor energy. They
can also exist as the result of environmental or error factors, as SGs
are highly complex nonlinear systems. Cyberattacks that influence such
variables are discussed at length throughout Section 4. The concept of
5766
J. Powell et al.
fault detection was briefly discussed in Section 4.3, where methods
such as state estimation and watermarking were applied for time
synchronization and data replay attacks. These methods are, however,
not always effective for complex attacks. For instance, the FDI attack
has been observed to be undetectable with conventional methods.
Currently, the best methods in detecting increasingly sophisticated
attacks and natural faults lies in leveraging machine learning. Utilizing
data, machine learning techniques such as deep or convolutional neural
networks are demonstrated to provide accurate and rapid diagnoses of
faults and cyberattacks.
He et al. (2017) proposed a real-time detection mechanism using
deep learning-based mechanisms. Applying deep learning techniques,
they recognize the behavioral patterns of the attacks through a his-
torical analysis of the measurement data, and successfully implement
the revealed features for real-time FDI attack detection. The results of
their simulation illustrate the resilience of their detection scheme to the
various amounts of attacked measurements, detection thresholds of the
state vector estimator (SVE), and degree of environmental noise levels
(He et al., 2017). Additionally, the ability of the employed scheme to
achieve high detection accuracy in the presence of the occasional op-
eration faults is demonstrated. Shi et al. (2021) proposed an approach
aimed at statistical FDI attack detection based on a new dimensionality
reduction method and a Gaussian mixture model. They proposed a
technique that involves two phases: a dimensionality reduction process
in the first phase and a semi-supervised learning process based on the
Gaussian mixture model in the second (Shi et al., 2021). The simulation
results from the tests demonstrate that the proposed scheme detected
the FDI attacks with high detection precision and achieved the desired
discrimination performance (Shi et al., 2021).
Oozeer and Haykin demonstrated how the entropic state and rein-
forcement learning was able to detect FDI attacks and drive them to a
controllable state, under the action of cognitive risk control (CRC). The
entropic state was originally proposed for use in smart grids in Oozeer
and Haykin (2019a), and expanded on by the same authors in Oozeer
and Haykin (2019b). In a cognitive dynamic system (CDS), the goal
of the system is to both control the state and minimize the amount
of unknown information in the perceptor. The latter is performed by
minimizing this entropic state, which is done by dynamically optimiz-
ing the estimation process (Oozeer and Haykin, 2019a). The authors
introduce the entropic states as a ‘‘new metric’’ for the SG, having
two key purposes: to be used to detect FDI attacks and to provide an
indication of the SG’s health from cycle-to-cycle (Oozeer and Haykin,
2019a). Through task-switching control, the cognitive dynamic system
(CDS) was able to enable a new executive with a different set of actions,
augmenting the system configuration to bring the risk to a manageable
state during an attack (Oozeer and Haykin, 2019a). The entropic state
represents the information gap, quantifying uncertainty and in the case
of Oozeer and Haykin (2019b), can be used to detect an attack. This
CRC method has been applied to other systems, such as vehicle-to-
vehicle (V2V) communication systems (Feng and Haykin, 2019), and
the CDS method in control systems is a rising research topic. Machine
learning based methods can also be applied for availability attack
prevention on various layers, such as in research conducted by Jokar
and Leung (2018) who proposed a detection and prevention scheme
based on ZigBee.
4.5.2. Blockchain
To improve the scalability and distributed nature of SGs, systems
have been integrated with the internet. Using the internet and wireless
frameworks, SG components can communicate and exchange informa-
tion across vast distances almost instantly, and users can access energy
from anywhere. However, as energy consumers and distributors grow
in number, the amount of connections (home, device, automobile, etc.)
will also grow exponentially. This poses a problem for SG technology,
where maintaining control over a continuously growing centralized
network would require a variety of advanced communication and
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Fig. 3. (Left) Client–Server Network (Right) Peer-to-Peer Network.
information infrastructures (Mollah et al., 2021). The centralization
of large internet-based networks also requires sophisticated security
protocols to be implemented, where the compromising of the central
node implies the compromising of all the data in the network. To reduce
to the detriments of a large centralized network and achieve more
efficient operation, the command node can be decentralized. However,
this can further introduce complexities in security as the number of
nodes and users attached to them increases (Mollah et al., 2021),
and additional innovative solutions are required. For achieving data
security in a decentralized SG, researchers are currently investigating
the application of Blockchain technology.
Blockchain technology is becoming increasingly prominent as a
method in decentralizing data. Fig. 3 contrasts the centralized and
distributed frameworks, where centralized systems request resources
and perform tasks from a single server, and the decentralized frame-
work is peer-to-peer and partitions tasks across different entities. Most
popular in cryptocurrency, Blockchain can be described as a distributed
ledger with an increasing number of securely linked records known as
blocks (Kumari et al., 2020). Cryptographic hashes are used for security
within the block links, where subsequent blocks contain the crypto-
graphic hash of the previous, as well as data concerning transactions
and time. The cascading and related information between linked blocks
effectively forms an irreversible chain of data. Blockchain networks
are peer-to-peer (P2P), where their decentralization offers increased
efficiency and security across data. Blockchain can vary in its per-
missions (Kumari et al., 2020), where for secure data transfer in SG
applications, private Blockchain is most desirable against cyberattacks.
Mollah et al. compose a comprehensive survey on blockchain imple-
mentation in SG (Mollah et al., 2021), primarily for the purposes of data
security in AMI, decentralized energy trading, monitoring and control,
and EV charging. Kumari et al. (2020) contribute to this topic, facili-
tating efficient demand response management with blockchain-based
secure energy trading. Their method was inspired by rising energy
needs and the inherent vulnerabilities of the current centralized energy
trading system to help accommodate this issue. For decentralizing and
securing this system, authors employ blockchain technology, where
they evaluate their framework’s performance based on computation
time and communication costs. Results were compared to that of a tra-
ditional centralized framework and determined that quality of service
was significantly improved. Mengelkamp et al. (2018) also explores
this application of blockchain, as well as Bansal et al. for electric
vehicles (Bansal et al., 2019).
For energy monitoring, Gao et al. implement blockchain for the
mitigation of compromised data over wireless networks, as well as
improving consumer’s understanding of their energy consumption (Gao
et al., 2018). They outline the structure of their sovereign blockchain
approach, using a unique block structure, where threading side blocks
from parent blocks are used to identify consumers and their requests.
All blocks on the chain are monitored, such that when attackers breach
the structure of data access, the system is alerted. Their platform is
5767
J. Powell et al.
demonstrated against other systems to be robust while maintaining
full consumer control and immutability over data. In research from
Kumar et al. (2023), blockchain is leveraged alongside digital twins
and deep learning for SG operation and security. Their blockchain-
based authentication method features the ability to withstand a large
number of attacks, while their deep learning framework enhances
attack detection with their self-attention mechanism and softmax clas-
sifier. They demonstrate enhanced efficiency compared to conventional
methods with their novel approach. Additional SG research that focuses
on blockchain implementation for data security within the system
include (Faheem et al., 2024; Mahmood et al., 2023).
4.5.3. Authentication
Another way of increasing cybersecurity in decentralized SG is
through the application of authentication protocols. An alternative
method in data privacy, authentication processes are different from
Blockchain, where users must confirm their eligibility for access to de-
vices or data. There are a variety of such schemes (El-hajj et al., 2019),
including procedure, context, token, and identity-based, where their
performance is based on the attack or context. Multi-way identification
and hardware can also be introduced to improve the security of access.
Generally, cyberattacks such as the MITM attack and replay attack can
be negated by the use of more sophisticated authorization protocols.
Badar et al. utilize a secure authentication protocol for home area
networks in SG-based cities (Badar et al., 2023). Their proposed frame-
work incorporates lightweight mutual authorization with cryptographic
one-way hash functions, promoting surveillance and security in SG me-
tering infrastructure. Additionally, they implement a physical unclon-
able function (PUF) for meter data encryption, ensuring cyberattack re-
silience due to its un-reproducible property. To validate their proposed
method, they demonstrate its effectiveness against a variety of attacks
(MITM, replay, etc.) and compare its computation and cost performance
against alternative methods. Another lightweight authentication proto-
col was developed by Fouda et al. (2011), based on the Diffie–Hellman
key establishment protocol and hash-based authentication. Addition-
ally, Saxena et al. discuss a joint authentication/authorization scheme
for confidentiality attacks that requires these processes to be verified
simultaneously (Saxena et al., 2016), and W. Chim et al. propose
their tamper-resistant-device-based Privacy-preserving Authentication
Scheme for Smart grid networks (known as PASS) (Chim et al., 2011).
4.5.4. Data encryption
Encryption is another security parameter that aligns with Blockchain
and authentication, encoding data that is transferred end-to-end, pro-
tecting it from malicious entities. To add, interception prevention is
not a feature of encryption, but encrypted data that is intercepted
would be unusable without the key. Encryption using cryptographic
keys is a crucial process in Blockchain technology and usually, these
keys are pseudo-randomly generated, granted to authorized recipi-
ents. Decryption without such keys is possible, though sophisticated
resources in algorithmic computation are typically needed for modern
methods. Although, if we consider the limited memory, battery life, and
computational ability of typical SG components (tablets, thermostats,
meters, etc.), the encryption process itself is constrained in its complex-
ity. Because of this heterogeneity, effective and lightweight encryption
processes must be employed for SG applications to protect data against
cyberattacks.
Countering confidentiality attacks with data encryption and authen-
tication processes are among the more widely applied methods, used
for nearly every interaction made on the internet. Concerning SG, Gao
et al. explore a hybrid method of data encryption that compresses and
encrypts the data in a single step (Gao et al., 2014). This approach,
known as EncryCS, was determined to improve both security and trans-
mission efficiency (Gao et al., 2014). Alternatively, Syed et al. pursued
homomorphic encryption for secure training of deep learning networks
used for fault identification and localization of smart grids (Syed et al.,
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
2020). To terminate the various types of integrity attacks, end-to-end
encryption and authentication schemes are necessary (Gunduz and Das,
2020). Sanjab et al. (2016) discuss implementing sequence numbers
and timestamps as an effective solution against replay attacks in SG
applications. Shapsough et al. (2015) outlines cryptography algorithms
as methods to prevent data integrity attacks. Rawat and Bajracharya
(2015) also lists increased security in SG monitoring through utilizing
the PMU more frequently, volt-VAR control based schemes, power
fingerprinting techniques, and the prevention of integrity attacks to-
wards data by using trusted network connection-based approaches. As
a means of countering MITM attacks, security gateways can be utilized
to encrypt network traffic (Gunduz and Das, 2020). Security gateways
are able to create VPN tunnels for network connection, data encryption
at the source, and decryption at the target (Gunduz and Das, 2020).
Typically, the encryption processes occur within hardware solutions.
Also, both the target and source of information should be authenticated
to interrupt and stop MITM attacks, as shown in Mrabet et al. (2018).
4.5.5. Infrastructure
To manage these cybersecurity techniques and put them into prac-
tice, SG security infrastructure must be considered. SG infrastructure in
this context can apply to a variety of hardware and software procedures
for maintaining robust security, such as cloud computing, data centers,
and various secure infrastructure systems, like firewalls and public key
infrastructure (PKI). These frameworks are additive to previously dis-
cussed network security methods, reinforcing these concepts or making
them possible. For instance, utilizing cloud computing complements
the limited computation of typical SG components, enabling enhanced
security by off-loading the processes.
Applying measures as discussed by Bedi et al. (2018), SQL injection
attacks can be significantly lessened across SG networks. They list
various SQL defenses such as initiating penetration tests, static code
checking, positive pattern matching, input type checking, avoiding the
use of dynamic SQL, limiting database access to remote users, and
filtering semicolons during type checking (Bedi et al., 2018). Metke and
Ekl (2010) also discussed including trusted computing methodologies
and PKI, which tethers a user’s identity to a public key using a digital
certificate. They believed that utilizing PKI technologies is the most de-
sirable solution for SG security, including the ‘‘policies and procedures
which describe the set up, management, updating, and revocation of
certificates’’, beyond software and hardware improvement (Metke and
Ekl, 2010). Ugale et al. relates SG security and reliability to efficient
and dependable communication infrastructures, where the standard in
meeting these requirements is attributed to cloud computing (Ugale
et al., 2011). Adopting the distributed computing framework in SGs
and their devices allows for increased computation, resulting in the
ability to utilize advanced control and encryption frameworks. As such,
higher efficiency and levels of security can be achieved globally in the
system. Data storage capacities are additionally increased, which can
be leveraged by intelligent frameworks (e.g., machine learning based
anomaly detection) for more informed decision making.
5. Interoperability
Interoperability refers to the ability to exchange and make use of
information. Interoperability presents one of the main features of SG
and consists of the capacity of the network technologies, sensors, and
electrical devices to use the interchanged information (Ayadi et al.,
2019). In order for SGs to respond to changes automatically and dynam-
ically in grid conditions, there is a need for sensors to provide real-time
status and information (Song et al., 2017a). This will require seamless
connectivity throughout the transmission and distribution system, to
enhance the energy flow coordination with real-time analysis and in-
formation (Kim et al., 2020). Interoperability improves the reliability of
SG by transferring collected information directly to the equipment, thus
improving and protecting the operations of the grid (Kim et al., 2020).
5768
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Fig. 4. Infrastructure of SG interoperability (Ayadi et al., 2019).
It will improve efficiency and stability of the SG network to avoid
overwhelming load on the grid and reduce possible blackouts (Ma et al.,
2013). Fig. 4 (Ayadi et al., 2019) provides an example of infrastructure
for SG interoperability.
The SG’s measurements, communications, and control technologies
are used to support system operations maintaining a balance between
load demand and electrical generation (Song et al., 2017a). The ge-
ographical disbursement of sensing and measurement devices on the
world-scale pose a challenge towards general scalability, availability,
and interoperability (Song et al., 2017a). Interoperability and data
exchange between sensors are major challenges for the SG.
An example of a vital operation that heavily relies on the monitor-
ing and measurement of electrical parameters in the distribution and
transmission networks is grid control (Song et al., 2017a). Sensors are
implemented to measure the physical parameters of transmission lines,
power generation, distribution lines, substations, energy storage, and
consumers (Song et al., 2017a). Such sensors include current trans-
formers (CTs), voltage transformers (VTs), smart meters, humidity and
temperature sensors, accelerometers, pyranometers and pyrheliometers
(for solar irradiance measurement), internet protocol (IP) network
cameras, power quality monitors and many more (King, 2018).
Control and Monitoring applications require various types of infor-
mation, such that the sensor data should meet the expected distribution
network operations. Some requirements of SG sensors are:
• Accurate synchronization of sensors to Coordinated Universal
Time (UTC) (Song et al., 2017a).
• Exceedingly accurate sensitivity and accuracy of measurements,
such as for voltage/current magnitudes and phase angle (Song
et al., 2017a; Goldstein, 2017)
• Rapid processing of intelligent algorithms and data, such as pro-
ducing synchronized frequencies, phasors, and rate of change of
frequency (ROCOF) estimates (Song et al., 2017a; Mak, 2010)
• Fast, reliable, and secure standards-based data transmission and
network communications (Song et al., 2017a).
• Sensor variety featuring dynamic range and high bandwidth, such
as measuring frequencies, voltages, and currents accurately across
a wide range (Song et al., 2017a; Yurish, 2010)
• Smart capabilities, including self-localization, self- identification,
self-calibration, self-diagnostics, and
self-awareness (Song et al., 2017a; Yurish, 2010)
• A multitude of sensing capabilities for physical (temperature, cli-
mate, weather, etc.) and electrical (power flow, current, voltage,
etc.) parameters (Song et al., 2017a).
• Standardized testing methodologies and interfaces to assist in
achieving Smart Sensor (SS) interoperability and plug-and-play
capabilities (Song et al., 2017a).
5.1. Communication and data exchange
Effective communication is critical to the successful deployment of
SG, where domains and sub-domains of the substations will use an
assortment of private and public, wired, and wireless communication
networks to interchange information (Farrokhabadi et al., 2017). Here
we outline the communication infrastructure required for this inherent
SG property, which is an important consideration for interoperability
between equipment. With updating communication methods and SG
equipment, maintaining interoperability is an essential research con-
sideration for contending with future energy demands. Interoperability
in this respect enables SGs to communicate and develop rapidly, at a
reduced cost, in a versatile manner for all components.
In general, telecommunication infrastructure is crucial, however
wireless communications offers much more freedom for information
collection, dissemination, and processing. Many suggestions for com-
munication methods have been made and some of the most commonly
considered communication technologies are ZigBee, Wireless Mesh, and
Power Line Communication (PLC). ZigBee is a short-range wireless
communication used in home area networks (Bari et al., 2014), wireless
mesh network communication connects multiple devices as nodes in
a larger network (Saadatmand et al., 2017), and PLC is a wire line
communication technique that is applied at very low costs (Ayadi et al.,
2019). Some relatively new, less explored communication options are
detailed as follows. Fig. 5 below also provides a representation of the
multiple communication layers involved in SG.
5.1.1. Wireless sensor network (WSN)
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are able to construct an extremely
reliable power grid with self-healing capabilities, necessary in the
deployment of SGs (Ma et al., 2013). Modern advancements in WSNs
have enabled the development of embedded electric utility monitoring
systems (Gungor et al., 2010). Some potential applications in the SG
5769
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Table 4
Summary of communication solution papers.
Year Reference Method
2012 2011 Li et al. (2012) Wireless communications for advanced metering infrastructure.
2013 Markovic et al. (2013) Cloud computing model
Feng and Yuexia (2011) SG communications architecture three different operating modes:
relay control, distribution, and home levels.
2020 Shahinzadeh et al. (2020) Joint 5G-IoT frameworks in SG and the associated enhancement in
interoperability.
2021 Alaerjan (2021) Distributed Data Interoperability Layer (DDIL)
2018 Alaerjan et al. (2018) Data distribution system-based approach.
2021 Cavalieri (2021) Merging of two common communication systems in both IoT and
SG domains: oneM2M and IEC 61850
2020 Bergmann et al. (2020) An approach to drive semantic interoperability, led by NIST, the
DOE, and multiple other national US laboratories.
Fig. 5. SG communication layers (Shahinzadeh et al., 2020).
include fault sensing, remote monitoring, and wireless automatic meter
reading (WAMR) (Gungor et al., 2010; di Bisceglie et al., 2009). WSNs
can be implemented and utilized across the whole SG network because
of its flexibility, rapid development, and low cost (Ma et al., 2013).
5.1.2. SG interoperability platform (SGIP)
To address common interoperability issues, the novel SGIP commu-
nication method consists of managing data and communication driven
interoperability, enabling data-centric communication in SG (Kim et al.,
2017a). The data-driven interoperability is guaranteed through the
implementation of a common semantic model, ensuring systems com-
municate in the same way (or, ‘‘in the same language’’) (Kim et al.,
2017a). The SGIP design is based on many questions and several
requirements, including support of both publish–subscribe and client–
server communication, support of reconstructing data objects, and
configurable quality of service (QoS) attributes for reliable commu-
nication (Kim et al., 2017a). Efforts have been made by NIST as
well to establish a SG interoperability panel (also called SGIP) and
interoperability in smart sensors (Song et al., 2018).
5.1.3. Advancements in communication
Table 4 presented below, summarizes the papers related to commu-
nications as examined in this section.
The authors in Li et al. (2012) proposed the application of wireless
communications for AMI. Focused on efficiency and security, they
propose a method that enables smart meter transmission when the large
changes are exhibited, referred to as Change and Transmit (CAT) (Li
et al., 2012). It was based on data that implies that the real-time power
consumption of households is most often constant and the change of
power use follows the Poisson distribution (Li et al., 2012). From this
trend, however, an attacker could eavesdrop and know when a user
is home. Considering this, the CAT method also utilizes an Artificial
Spoofing Packet (ASP) to send false packets to attackers (Li et al.,
2012). The scheme proposed by the authors accounts for the Poisson
power consumption nature to administer their wireless communication
infrastructure and was effective for mitigating attacks, comparing the
effectiveness of adjusted defense schemes.
Markovic et al. (2013) provides an in-depth discussion on a cloud
computing model for SGs, where the delivery of computing is intro-
duced as a service. This means that information, software, and storage
are provided to devices as a product. Cloud computing is an architec-
ture deemed suitable for SG applications, since its services can achieve
storage and transfer of data, communication, and real time computation
at substantial scales (Markovic et al., 2013). The authors highlight the
benefits and disadvantages of cloud-based schemes, where for instance,
its dependence on internet connectivity poses operational and security
issues (Markovic et al., 2013). Additionally, specific applications and
use-cases are outlined in the scope of cloud computing in SG, with an
emphasis on modern systems (state of the art a decade ago) and future
challenges that have been the subject of research since.
Proposed in Feng and Yuexia (2011) is an SG communications archi-
tecture using modern wireless communication technologies, operating
in three different modes: relay control, distribution, and home levels.
The distribution mode is cooperative, and because of its structure, it
can dynamically solve complex coverage problems with low losses and
costs, and unified resources, suitable for SGs (Feng and Yuexia, 2011).
The relay-based system is also cooperative, featuring a node structure
that can communicate with other nodes directly or by picking off its
connection to another node (Feng and Yuexia, 2011). This can also be
thought of as the wireless mesh discussed in Saadatmand et al. (2017).
The home or indoor mode is short range, but can achieve high quality
and fast connections using little power, similar to a WiFi network (Feng
and Yuexia, 2011). Exhibiting low latency and high bandwidth char-
acteristics, the architecture proposed that encompasses all three nodes
was effective in several video monitoring and on-demand experiments,
scalable for SGs.
Researchers in Shahinzadeh et al. (2020) presented an introduc-
tion to 5G communication networks and the Role of Joint 5G-IoT
Framework for SG Interoperability Enhancement. They analyzed the
fundamentals of 5G communication and the 5G-IoT purposes in SG.
From their review, it was concluded by the authors that the develop-
ment of communication infrastructure with 5G-IoT has positive impacts
on the flexibility, autonomy, reliability, speed, security, and economy
of operation of the SG (Shahinzadeh et al., 2020). Speed in SG com-
munication is a crucial benefit, where cybersecurity and stability are
improved with decreased transmission delays.
In their research, Alaerjan (2021) presented a Distributed Data
Interoperability Layer (DDIL). This layer is a connectivity layer, en-
abling seamless data exchange between applications in IoT domains.
5770
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Table 5
Summary of interoperability testing papers.
Year Reference Method
2018 Papaioannou et al. (2018) 2017 2022 Song et al. (2017a) Song et al. (2022) 2020 Ginocchi et al. (2020) Analysis of current methods and principles of
interoperability testing. Proposes a method for
developing SG interoperability tests.
Passive interoperability test scheme for smart
sensors, ensuring interoperability of sensor data.
Procedure for modeling the interoperability of
smart sensor interactions, while applying finite
state processes and labeled transition systems to
automatically and quantitatively measure and
assess the interoperability.
Testing methodology proposed in Sanjab et al.
(2016) and investigates a flexibility activation
mechanism in a power grid system.
Using model transformation techniques, the DDIL addresses data inter-
operability issues. It is ‘‘developed into a set of configurable features
to support the flexibility requirements in IoT applications’’ (Alaer-
jan, 2021). The DDIL was designed to be modular and extendable,
and develop four applications based on different protocols to test its
effectiveness in a simulated SG environment (Alaerjan, 2021). Experi-
mental results demonstrated that the proposed DDIL successfully allows
seamless data exchange between the communicating applications, even
on constrained devices (Alaerjan, 2021). Alaerjan et al. (2018) also
detailed a data distribution system-based approach for addressing in-
teroperability challenges that exist in SG. A unified data model was
adopted to build data distribution system topics, acting as the primary
data exchange medium. Their experiment corroborated the viability
of the data distribution system and its potential in supporting the
interoperability of protocols (Alaerjan et al., 2018).
Researchers in Cavalieri (2021) proposed a novel solution towards
the unification of two of the most commonly applied communication
systems in IoT and SG domains: oneM2M and IEC 61850. Their se-
mantic interoperability solution is primarily based on the concept of
common ontology between different ontologies and oneM2M ontology-
based interworking (Cavalieri, 2021). It was also proposed to be applied
to the interworking strategy. A detailed illustration of the architecture
was provided, consisting of the IEC and IoT servers, the IoT domain, the
interworking proxy application entity (IPE), and the proposed ontol-
ogy (Cavalieri, 2021). Cavalieri’s proposal forwards the advancement of
IoT implementation in SG, contributes to the limited scope of literature
focused on IPE, and expands on the oneM2M definition (Cavalieri,
2021).
Presented in Bergmann et al. (2020) by Bergmann et al. was an
approach to drive semantic interoperability, led by NIST, the DOE
Building Technologies Office, and several other US national laborato-
ries. Their approach consists of the following steps: a semantic interop-
erability standard to regulate and identify the interoperable attributes
of applications and equipment, industry coordination and engagement,
and tools to assist in testing and implementation, ensuring product
compliancy with semantic interoperability specifications (Bergmann
et al., 2020). Their approach accelerates the timeline for the adoption of
other semantic interoperability specifications (Bergmann et al., 2020).
5.2. Standards
Standards help to ensure interoperability and confidentiality con-
sidering communication in SGs. Communication standards are a set
of rules dictating the method, timing, and content of communication
for a variety of scenarios and paths. They are generally used in SG
and other interacting systems to increase communication quality and
efficiency, and reduce uncertainty in task execution. In the context
of SG, furthering the development of these standards is essential in
grid modernization, where increased communication fidelity implies
the improved implementation, speed, and robustness of cybersecurity
measures, remote metering, data analysis, etc. Standards are an addi-
tive and necessary parameter to existing SG technologies. There are a
plethora of existing standards and protocols that have been established
for SG equipment specifically or other technologies. Additionally, new
standards are constantly being developed to increase SG interoperabil-
ity. Two key guidelines used to designate standards are if they support
the evolution of SG interoperability, and the standard’s level of support
from the establishing agency.
There are numerous standards for varying types of SG applications,
discussed extensively in a survey from Demertzis et al. (2021). Such
standard categories examined in their work include smart transmission
systems, advanced distribution management and automation, energy
resources, and AMI. They also discuss developing standards at the time
of writing, or standards that require additional mappings and configu-
rations. An example of a crucial standard is IEEE 1815-2012 (DNP3),
which is a set of communications protocols applied between elements
for the automation of process systems (Song et al., 2017a). DNP3 plays
a vital role in SCADA systems, developed for communications between
different types of control and data acquisition equipment (IE.E.E. Stan-
dards Association, 2012). There are lists of standards presented in the
document created by the NIST based on comments from stakeholders,
public review, and workshops (Ma et al., 2013). For example, IEEE
1588 is used for time synchronization and management of equip-
ment across SGs, and IEC 61850 Suite is for communications within
transmission and distribution sectors, as noted by NIST (NIST, 2010).
5.3. Testing
Although standards help with some interoperability challenges pre-
sented in SG, issues can still arise. Interoperability testing is key to
achieving seamless interoperability of SG applications, due to the com-
plexity involved in aspects of modern power systems (Ginocchi et al.,
2020). Interoperability testing is used to verify that multiple devices
and/or systems are capable of interoperability based on the same stan-
dards, preventing against the failure of a system with non-standardized
equipment (Durand, 2012). Table 5, seen below, summarizes the papers
related to interoperability testing examined in this section.
The authors of Papaioannou et al. (2018) presented an analysis of
current methods and principles of interoperability testing, and pro-
posed a method for developing/prototyping SG interoperability tests.
Papaioannou et al. describes the method as a series of steps, the first
being identifying the use case of the method, with the second and third
involved in determining the BAP and BAIOP profiles (Papaioannou
et al., 2018). The following steps are involved in the experiment’s sta-
tistical design, interoperability testing, and final analysis (Papaioannou
et al., 2018). The method provided a modern theoretical analysis of
working methods proposed for addressing SG interoperability.
Researchers in Song et al. (2017a,b) proposed a passive interop-
erability test scheme for smart sensors to ensure the interoperability
5771
J. Powell et al.
of sensor data. Passive methods are typically generalized as interoper-
ability fault monitoring methods, whereas active methods apply some
stimuli to the system to test what normal operation is Ginocchi et al.
(2020). The research describes the capabilities of smart sensors, as
well as the model’s compatibility with PMU (Song et al., 2017a). The
method was tested, and the results demonstrate the functionality of
the proposed interoperability test scheme. Passive methods are also
explored in Chen (2013).
The authors of Ginocchi et al. (2020) used the testing methodology
proposed in Papaioannou et al. (2018) and applied it to a specialized
SG use case. The situation examines a flexibility activation mechanism
and flexibility source interactions in power grid systems (including
DSO SCADA) and Remote Terminal Units to support a voltage reg-
ulation service. The method incorporates a design of the experiment
and testing procedures described by Papaioannou et al. (2018), using
a physical test bed that simulates the power grid and communica-
tion network (Ginocchi et al., 2020). Experimental results proved the
applicability of the procedure from Papaioannou et al. (2018) for
testing the large scale interoperability of more complicated SGs. It
was determined that rigorous analyses of statistics are required for
a proper investigation of interoperability performance and parameter
interactions (Ginocchi et al., 2020).
Song et al. (2022) describes a procedure for modeling the smart sen-
sor interoperability considering interactions. Applied to a case study of
the interaction between an IEEE C37.118 PMU-based sensor and phasor
data concentrators, the model was designed generically as a message
operation between sender/receiver (Song et al., 2022). They used
finite state processes and labeled transition systems to quantitatively
and automatically assess and measure interoperability (Song et al.,
2022). The model worked to improve interoperability by identifying
and resolving interoperability issues in the case study, without a time
constraint (Song et al., 2022). Based on other standard protocols, their
model could additionally be applied for interoperability modeling of
other smart sensors.
6. Renewable energy integration (REI)
While the traditional power grid is comparatively limited, the elec-
trical energy flow and generation in SG is considerably more adapt-
able (Fang et al., 2012). SG allows for safe integration of renewable
energy resources into the grid, supplementing the power supply with
the power generated and stored by a consumer (Khurana et al., 2010).
Modern grids are also capable of this net metering system in some
places, such as for homes that have solar panels. The utilization of
renewable energy sources in the electrical grid is rapidly increasing,
due to a need for reduced dependency on conventional energy sources
(i.e., fossil fuels) and high power demands. The integration of renew-
able energy sources into SG is being continuously studied and advanced
due to its realized importance (Mohamed et al., 2015).
6.1. Challenges
Renewable energy source integration into the power grid poses
multiple technical issues (Ochoa and Harrison, 2011). These include
reliability, efficiency, energy conversion cost, power quality, security,
safety, and the appropriate management of loads (Ming et al., 2010;
Liserre et al., 2010; Shafiullah et al., 2010). Renewable energy gen-
eration is incredibly variable, and the quantity of power generated
is greatly impacted by the weather forecast. Integrating variable gen-
eration presents many unique challenges to the performance of the
power grid, including key factors such as the power movement type
and generator design, expected run types, the position of the grid in
relation to renewable energy sources, the interactions between differ-
ent renewable energy sources, and the general characteristics of the
grid (Ming et al., 2010; Shafiullah et al., 2010). There are many signif-
icant challenges SG system developers (Fadaeenejad et al., 2014), with
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
plenty of research being conducted about current and future issues.
After surveying current and future applications for SG REI, (Gaviano
et al., 2012) ensured that electronic device communication is a crucial
technology to integrate renewable energy sources.
6.2. Benefits
Despite there being numerous challenges, there are also multiple
positive impacts that the integration of renewable energy will have
on the grid system. First, is the positive environmental impact. REI
within the grid enables less dependency on energy generated by fossil
fuels which will reduce carbon dioxide emissions (Ayadi et al., 2020).
The impact on the climate can be minimized by making it simpler to
incorporate renewable energy sources, where SGs leverage automation
systems, usage data and models, and bidirectional communications for
improved efficiency (Khurana et al., 2010). Second, there is a positive
social aspect. When people utilize their own energy production systems
(such as rooftop solar panels), they can receive rebates for generating
their own energy, as well as having a contingency if there is a power
grid failure (Ayadi et al., 2020). Finally, there is a positive economic
aspect as increased integration of renewable energy will create new
jobs.
6.3. Variability
Non-renewable energy sources are typically controllable and re-
liable and generate a consistent amount of energy (Worighi et al.,
2019). Unfortunately, renewable energy sources do not generate a
stable quantity like non-renewable sources and are heavily influenced
by a variety of conditions. Consequently, one of the main challenges
of using renewable energy sources are their intermittency and stochas-
tic behavior (Akhtar and Rehmani, 2015). Renewable energy sources
are fundamentally different than non-renewable generation since the
production is uncertain, intermittent, and not dispatched (unable to be
controlled on demand) (Bitar et al., 2011). Variability is the term used
to encompass these three characteristics and presents one of the most
important obstacles of the deep penetration of integrating renewable
generation into the power grid system (Moura, 2009). Penetration in
the context of renewable energy and SG refers to the percentage of
electricity generated for a SG by a renewable resource, where in deep
penetration, a high percentage of total energy is generated by these
sources. Deep penetration is a more recent vision for the SG, but the
limited predictability and variability of these renewable energy sources
have presented a myriad of technical challenges for grids (Eltigani and
Masri, 2015). These challenges include methods of energy storage man-
agement, effective forecasting, power system stability, voltage control,
and demand management systems (Xie et al., 2011; Shafiullah et al.,
2010; Commission et al., 2012; Wasiak and Hanzelka, 2009; Camacho
et al., 2011).
Modern operations of the electrical power system are designed to
accommodate the natural load demand variability, as well as adapt to
both unplanned and planned contingencies, at different timescales (Bitar
et al., 2011). This is performed through implementing operational
reserves, load frequency control, unit and scheduling commitment,
load shedding, and demand response (Bitar et al., 2011). At deep
penetration levels, renewable energy sources add significant variability,
not capable of being handled by the current system. Previous research
has suggested that the existing management mechanisms could only
handle renewable generation up to 20% penetration levels (Energy
Great Lakes Regional Wind, 2010; Energy et al., 2010). The reconfigu-
ration of these mechanisms comes with significant operational and cost
issues (DeCesaro et al., 2009).
Solar and wind energy pose the main problems for deep pene-
tration of REI, since hydroelectric, geothermal, and biomass energy
sources are considered, by their nature, relatively more predictable
and stable, having no notable issues with SG integration (Ming et al.,
2010; Shafiullah et al., 2010). This is mainly due to the fact that they
are mature processes, but more importantly, power companies have
near-full control over the fuel source.
5772
J. Powell et al.
6.3.1. Solar
Solar power generation has a natural daily cycle of variability, and
beyond this, weather changes such as cloud cover can significantly
affect the source’s power output. For instance, solar insolation can vary
by more than 80% of its peak in a very short time (Marcos et al., 2011).
Considering this, the absorption of solar rays are needed for solar panels
to generate electricity, hence it is essential to optimize both the size
and direction of the panels to maximize energy generation (Worighi
et al., 2019). Additionally, it is vital to consider other factors such
as the maximum power output of the panel and supporting devices
such as inverters. Also, solar panel performance depends on several
factors such as the quantity of sunlight, air density, temperature, and
efficiency (Worighi et al., 2019).
6.3.2. Wind
Wind is another renewable energy source with high variability.
Wind speed and direction are consistently unpredictable due to weather
changes and seasons. Severe weather can result in wind turbines operat-
ing at unsafe speeds, forcing a shutdown, and it is also difficult to obtain
accurate and reliable forecasting of wind power production (Bitar
et al., 2011). To achieve the integration of wind power in SG, four
conditions must be met: the phase sequence of the power frequency
and the wind power frequency must be close to the grid, the terminal
voltage magnitude must match the grid, and the phase angle between
the two voltages must be within five percent (Caribbean Renewable
EnergyDevelopment Programme (CREDP), 2004).
6.4. Forecasting
Challenges in grid operations with deep penetration of renewable
energy sources become far more manageable if accurate solar and
wind energy production forecasts are available beforehand Bitar et al.
(2011). Meteorology plays a substantial role in improving REI into
the grid network. Knowing the relevant long-term weather patterns
is needed to develop a smarter power grid (Shafiullah et al., 2010).
Accurate forecasting can mitigate the negative effects of integrating
renewable energy sources and can allow for statistical correlations
between meteorological hazards and production (Ourahou et al., 2020).
In addition to scheduling systems, forecasting accuracy is essential
for establishing sustainable load management systems, and for using
renewable resources appropriately (Shafiullah et al., 2010).
Accurate weather forecasting can alleviate some of the variability
issues encountered by wind and solar. As the accuracy of the weather
forecast increases, the prediction of how much energy will be generated
by renewable sources will become more accurate, reducing uncer-
tainties in generation. Weather forecasting has existed for centuries,
however, more modern methods are being developed to produce more
accurate forecasts. Hewage et al. (2021) proposed an effective deep
learning-based, fine-grained weather forecasting model. For forecast-
ing, the proposed model utilized multiple layers that used surface
weather parameters across a time span. Their experiment showed the
model produced better results than the typical weather research and
forecasting (WRF) model, proving its accurate forecasting potential
up to 12 h (Hewage et al., 2021). Also for SG, Wang et al. (2024)
developed an accurate deep learning model for solving the difficult
problem of wind speed forecasting. They demonstrated higher precision
predictions than other models using their two-stage data processing
method (Wang et al., 2024).
6.5. Power quality
There are many potential technical challenges that can be faced
with increasing the penetration of renewable energy sources. Among
the most crucial concerns of these is power quality. It is generally
desirable for electrical power to be transmitted reliably, and in a stable
manner across an entire system. Power quality is a measure of how
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
consistently the transmitted energy meets these specification, where
failure in achieving consistently high levels of quality can result in
system damage, shutdown, or malfunction. This notion is especially
important for the commercial power grid and SG, where data loss can
be an additional consequence to region-wide power loss.
There are a variety of factors that can influence power quality,
which can be the result of deep renewable energy penetration in
the context of SG. These challenges include voltage fluctuation, reac-
tive power, power system transients and harmonics, switching actions,
electromagnetic interference (EMI), synchronization, low power fac-
tor, long transmission lines, storage systems, forecasting and schedul-
ing, and load management (Ming et al., 2010; Liserre et al., 2010;
Cartwright, 2006). In literature, there have been numerous advance-
ments in counteracting these issues in the context of SG, which will
be reviewed for select factors in this section. For efficiency, it is vital
for devices connected to traditional power grids and SG to meet the
required power quality standards.
6.5.1. Voltage fluctuation
Voltage fluctuation can occur randomly or systematically, and are
characterized by variations in normal voltage values. This can degrade
equipment performance or result in current or voltage instability, which
can consequentially result in overheating, efficiency loss, etc. Normally,
fluctuations less than 10% do not significantly effect electronic equip-
ment (Masoum and Fuchs, 2015), but effects vary across frequency
and equipment sensitivities. Voltage fluctuation is a substantial con-
sequence of solar- and wind-based energy because of the intermittency
of generation (Shafiullah et al., 2010), reducing the longevity of most
equipment since even small fluctuations disturbs sensitive electronic
components (Linh, 2009; El-Tamaly et al., 2007). Periodic disturbances
to network voltages, known as flicker, are a significant issue seen
in weak grids. The degree of flicker is quantified by the allowable
difference in voltage in terms of frequency and the short-term severity
level (Shafiullah et al., 2010; Bossanyi et al., 1998).
A short survey was conducted by Colak and Kayisli (2021) con-
sidering voltage and frequency fluctuations effects in smart power
electronics, where active control methods were examined for solutions
in wind power. Faraji et al. propose their own central control system for
stabilizing the traded active power between the smart photovoltaic (PV)
inverter and upstream network, as well as a volt-VAR control strategy
for symmetric and asymmetric fluctuations in the PV inverter (Faraji
et al., 2024). Their solution to power quality issues for solar power
networks was demonstrated to be an improvement over the stud-
ied conventional methods. Visser et al. also consider PV solar power
systems in an urban power grid, proposing three separate voltage
regulation strategies for mitigating fluctuations (Visser et al., 2022).
Specifically, they explore active power curtailment, grid reinforcement,
and supercapacitors. Kuwałek (2021) alternatively studies the identifi-
cation and localization of voltage fluctuations considering power grids,
indicating the origin of the disturbance load and estimating parameters
associated with it. Their novel approach targets smart metering infras-
tructure, using a statistical assessment of the estimated voltage signal
component propagation.
6.5.2. Harmonic distortion
Harmonic distortion can be characterized by the presence of unde-
sirable frequency components in power systems. Non-linear appliances
with power electronics inject harmonics into the grid, which have
the potential to induce voltage distortion issues (Shafiullah et al.,
2010). Such power quality issues can result in increasing temperatures,
faulty regulation, timing issues, and efficiency losses. To keep the total
harmonic distortions to an acceptable level, these operation harmon-
ics must be minimized. According to IEEE standards, power system
harmonics should be limited in two ways: by the harmonic voltage
supplied by the utility to any customer at the point of common coupling
5773
J. Powell et al.
(PCC) and the harmonic current injectable by users into the utility
system at the PCC (Shafiullah et al., 2010; Khadem et al., 2010).
Using a hybrid control approach with Namib beetle optimization
and recalling enhanced neural networks (NBO-RERNN), Rajesh et al.
achieve improved power quality by mitigating harmonics in a PV
generation system (Rajesh et al., 2024). With a cascaded multilevel
inverter, the optimality of their hybrid controller is increased, fulfilling
load demands and reducing the impacts of additional disturbances in
the grid. Ghaffari et al. also explore harmonic distortion and efficiency
loss mitigation in SG, where they instead apply optimal siting and
sizing of wind turbines and their storage systems (Ghaffari et al., 2024).
Zhao and Milanović (2024) were able to achieve accurate prediction of
individual order and total harmonic distortions in a renewable energy-
integrated SG, using sequential artificial neural networks with limited
monitoring. In identifying the origins of harmonics, authors are ale to
mitigate their effects on power effectiveness. Joga et al. alternatively
apply dual-tree complex wavelet transforms (DTCWTs) of voltage and
current signals to extract features from non-active power quantities to
identify harmonics (Joga et al., 2024).
6.5.3. Electromagnetic interference
Another factor contributing to the degradation of power quality is
EMI. The result of electromagnetic induction, conduction, or coupling,
EMI induces a disturbance on electronics that can severely degrade
their performance or functionality. Considering power transmission,
this is especially harmful, resulting in efficiency losses or failure in
components. Additionally, EMI can deteriorate data paths in wireless
networks, which are vital to SG operation. Shadare et al. outline notable
sources of EMI in SGs (Shadare et al., 2017), where power electronic
interfaces (such as AMI) can introduce errors such as compromised en-
ergy readings. Since integrating systems that produce EMI is inevitable,
numerous protection and mitigation strategies have been researched.
Artificial intelligence is leveraged for EMI fault detection and clas-
sification in SG transmission lines (Chetan Khadse and Chaudhari,
2021) by Khadse et al.. Bayesian regularization networks are trained
on feature extracted fault datasets, where their proposed framework
exhibits high accuracy, outperforming conventional methods. EMI can
also be intentional, where malicious entities induce failures or errors
in SG using high power EMI sources placed in proximity to essential
equipment. Arduini et al. (2023) studies the effects of this type of
exposure on SCADA protection relays, identifying failure modes and
conducting a risk assessment. Nateghi et al. investigate intentional
EMI, identifying the effects of EMI sweep frequency jamming signals
in wireless smart meters (Nateghi et al., 2021).
6.5.4. Reactive power
Where active power is the power expended by the load, reactive
power exists as stored energy and is reflected back to SG. Reactive
power occurs due to out of phase voltage and current in AC circuits.
Reactive power is the portion where no net transfer occurs, and the
energy oscillates between the load and source. Considering efficiency
of power transfer and power quality, reactive power is undesirable, as
increasing it increases the current drawn for a load, increasing losses
due to heat. This would also increase the cost of system operation and
the frequency of maintenance. To mitigate the detrimental effects of
reactive power in SG, researchers have developed a variety of methods
for real-time optimization.
Muthukumaran and Kalyani (2021) apply reactive power optimiza-
tion in SG by means of evolutionary algorithm for demand side man-
agement control. The proposed method improves voltage profile and
minimizes power loss, compared to other meta-heuristic algorithms
like particle swarm optimization (PSO). Chandrasekaran et al. alter-
natively apply artificial neural networks for renewable energy based
SGs for managing reactive power balance, resulting in the same bene-
fits (Chandrasekaran et al., 2021). Additionally, Abdelhady et al. apply
real-time reactive power correction using a genetic algorithm (Abdel-
hady et al., 2020), and Alenius et al. (2020) propose an active reactive
power compensation using an adaptive control method and inductance
estimation.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
6.5.5. Devices
Various devices and control systems can be implemented into the
grid to help mitigate the power quality challenges. In order to minimize
potential challenges, efficient power converter design, which considers
the physical and dynamic properties of individual energy sources, is
essential. Inverters are designed for the purpose of integrating dis-
tributed generation into the grid, while maintaining power quality
standards (Khadem et al., 2010). If they are, however, not applied
correctly, additional harmonics could be introduced through high fre-
quency switching of the inverters. By designing electronics to feature
control systems, power quality can be improved while mitigating volt-
age fluctuations and harmonic distortion (Khadem et al., 2010). Custom
devices such as series active power filters, shunt active power filters,
and a hybrid of the two are some of the latest developments, over-
coming both voltage and current disturbances by absorbing the load or
by compensating the harmonic and reactive power generated (Liserre
et al., 2010; Linh, 2009; El-Tamaly et al., 2007; Khadem et al., 2010).
6.5.6. Synchronization
The synchronization of grid phase, frequency, and voltage is a
popular area of research towards power quality control. One of the
most common methods is based on phase-locked loop, a control method
where input and output signals have related phases (Shafiullah et al.,
2010). Other techniques for synchronization, described in Liserre et al.
(2010), include using multiple filters paired with a nonlinear trans-
formation or detecting the zero crossing of the grid. However, these
methods are not as popular or well performing as phase-locked loop
control, where filtering introduces feedback delays and zero cross-
ing methods could be incorrectly triggered under the presence of
noise (Liserre et al., 2010).
There are multiple proposed solutions to help improve power qual-
ity in the Gandoman et al. (2018) reviews the use of Flexible AC
Transmission Systems (FACTSs) to improve multiple aspects, including
power quality, of the SG. They examined that distributed FACTSs help
to improve not only power quality, but also energy utilization, power
factor, and ensuring energy efficiency. Ceaki et al. (2017) examines the
issues of harmonic disturbances caused by solar power and electric ve-
hicles on the grid and proposes a solution of connecting a passive filter
in each of the two systems. They concluded that the harmonic spectrum
decreased, and the voltage waveforms improved after including the
passive filter.
6.6. Demand management
Provided the intrinsic irregular nature of renewable energy sources,
maintaining an appropriate power supply requires a load demand
management system (Shafiullah et al., 2010). This increases the overall
efficiency and quality of the system, and can be achieved by scheduling,
shifting, and/or reducing demand Ming et al. (2010), Shafiullah et al.
(2010). In reducing demand, peak demand can be reduced, resulting
in a smoother demand profile, as well as reduced costs and improved
reliability.
Many of the methods of improving demand management focus on
forecasting demand and incentivizing consumers to use during off-
peak times. Gope and Sikdar (2019) proposes a scheme for forecasting
power demand in SGs based on masking-based spatial data aggrega-
tion. The authors concluded that their scheme can ensure improved
computational efficiency and privacy protection in comparison to ex-
isting solutions. Making use of deep Q-learning, Razzak et al. also
develop a prediction model for consumer electricity prices and demand,
outperforming current models through iterative and data-based learn-
ing (Razzak et al., 2024). Further load forecasting machine learning
methods are also presented in Liu et al. (2024), Kumar et al. (2024).
Kishore and Snyder (2010) proposed an optimization model for deter-
mining the amount of time an appliance is used for to take advantage
of the lower rates occurring on off-peak periods. An enhanced energy
5774
J. Powell et al.
Fig. 6. Forecasting model training diagram (Bani Ahmad et al., 2023).
management controller (EMC) optimization model that accounts for the
capacity constraints of potential electricity was also introduced. Bani
Ahmad et al. proposed an alternative demand management optimiza-
tion system based on machine learning, able to maintain efficiency in
energy consumption and resiliency against malicious agents (Bani Ah-
mad et al., 2023). The forecasting models based on data generally are
formulated using the training diagram presented below in Fig. 6.
6.7. Energy storage
Storage systems are designed to deliver short-term power which is
used for frequency and voltage support, renewable generation variabil-
ity, and power quality correction (Benzi et al., 2011). Energy storage
systems are a fundamental part of incorporating renewable energy
resources into SGs. The variability of such resources can be reduced
since these systems store excess energy during off-peak periods and
supply it during peak hours (Alotaibi et al., 2020).
Even though there are a large number of technologies available
for storing energy in SGs, many are neither economical or efficient.
Efficient storage technologies are necessary for the reliability of electric
power systems, where researchers analyze the utility of energy storage
with respect to peak shaving, frequency stability, voltage support,
transmission upgrade deferral, and renewable firming (Salkuti, 2020).
Other issues currently faced in this research include degradation, sizing
and allocation, and feasibility (Tan et al., 2021). In their typically
distributed installation, storage systems can additionally feature energy
losses due to uncoordinated control and state of charge (SoC) imbal-
ance. Real-time control strategies have been implemented to counteract
this effect. Degradation in some storage systems (i.e., batteries) are also
an issue, which have increasing losses overtime. Material research and
control strategies are being investigated to mitigate degradation. The fi-
nancial feasibility of energy storage systems is an emerging issue, where
the attractive portions of SG implementation (e.g., environmental im-
pact, energy savings by consumers and distributors) are not necessarily
met if the storage systems are expensive to produce/maintain or use
harmful/rare materials. There are also challenges faced in considering
specific storage systems. For instance, thermochemical systems typi-
cally lack in effectiveness, where storage and mitigating heat losses are
the result of scrupulous process monitoring and material selection (Tan
et al., 2021).
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Energy storage systems provide a method of delivering and storing
energy to for when renewable energy sources are not able to be
generated and ensuring a balance between supply and demand Hegazy
(2012). They are also important in avoiding the wasting of the gener-
ated renewable energy (Worighi et al., 2019). Storage systems are able
to supply power until a low SoC is reached, where the primary energy
source then activates to charge the storage system (Hegazy, 2012).
There are a variety of storage technologies which need to be chosen
accordingly for particular applications, as examined in Department of
Energy (2016).
Considering the perspective of REI, the main consideration is de-
termining when energy should be co-located at generation sites or
distributed across the grid (Bitar et al., 2011). Co-located storage
devices allow for the possibility of real-time control, reducing the
variability of the renewable energy output. It is therefore necessary
to determine the minimum storage size that is needed to attain a
certain extent of probability for satisfying the desired output power
profile (Bitar et al., 2011).
Tan et al. (2021) extensively examines and reviews various energy
storage technologies and their applications with REI, including elec-
trochemical, mechanical, thermal, and electromagnetic systems. They
examine the advantages, disadvantages, and applications of energy
storage technologies, commenting on the future research and goals of
the most promising considering renewable sources. Pang et al. (2012)
discusses the advantages of using plug-in hybrid or battery-based elec-
tric vehicles as a means of energy storage for outage and demand side
management. The energy storage method is dynamically configurable
and dispersed, operating as a vehicle-to-building system (Pang et al.,
2012).
6.7.1. Flywheel based energy storage systems
Stored as kinetic energy, flywheel technology efficiency is approxi-
mately 99% effective and ideal for large-scale regulation purposes, with
standby losses ranging from only 0.2 to 2% (Dileep, 2020; Arghandeh
et al., 2012). It has a rapid dynamic response, long life expectancy,
and relatively high characteristics of self-discharge rate, energy density,
power, cycling rate, and energy conversion efficiency (Salkuti, 2020).
For short periods of time, the flywheel can administer peak power
and fast responses used for balancing grid voltage sag correction and
frequency oscillations (Samineni et al., 2006). Additionally, during
grid disturbances, they provide highly reliable ride through for critical
loads (Arghandeh et al., 2012). Some limitations remain however,
where since they can only have these benefits on loads for short
periods of time, they must be used in conjunction with other storage
devices (Arghandeh et al., 2012). Additionally, they are difficult to
install, and operation standards are limited (Arghandeh et al., 2012).
Arghandeh et al. simulate flywheel storage methods for a facility mi-
crogrid, demonstrating the aforementioned benefits (Arghandeh et al.,
2012).
6.7.2. Hydrogen based energy storage systems
In this system, the electricity is generated through reverse electro-
chemical reactions within fuel cells (Salkuti, 2020). Though having
a low efficiency (around 50%), these types of storage systems have
adequate dynamic response, can be used for long periods of time, and
have no emissions since their only by-product is water (Salkuti, 2020).
Research conducted by Chamandoust et al. are one such example of
hydrogen storage implementation, proposing an optimization model
with multiple objectives for SGs (Chamandoust et al., 2021). Using four
case studies, results demonstrate the storage system’s effectiveness in
terms of operation cost and reliability, but energy consumption deviates
from the desired value due to the charging mode (Chamandoust et al.,
2021).
5775
J. Powell et al.
6.7.3. Thermal and electrical energy storage systems
Thermal energy is converted from electrical energy using their
generation systems that generally consist of the storage heat exchanger,
heating and cooling setups, and an air handling unit (Salkuti, 2020),
but are generally categorized in terms of sensible, latent, and thermo-
chemical storages (Enescu et al., 2020). The charging that is required
for this type of system can be done centrally or locally, with load
shifting also available (Abujubbeh et al., 2019). These systems typically
feature frequency regulation, rapid response rate, high efficiency (close
to 100%), and large storage capacities. Methods and case studies in this
storage type are explored in Enescu et al. (2020).
Not widely adopted, magnetic coils, ultracapacitors, and super con-
ductors are costly alternatives (Avancini et al., 2019). Considering
electrical systems, ultracapacitors can be used to improve their reli-
ability and performance, resulting in high power densities, and dis-
charging/charging capacities (Panda and Das, 2021). They also provide
additional power to the fuel cell plant during transient or peak pe-
riods (Uzunoglu and Alam, 2006). However, they cannot alone store
significant amounts of energy (Uzunoglu and Alam, 2006), which is
why they are typically used in hybrid structures, demonstrated in
the following subsection. Shi and Crow (2008) outline mathematical,
electric circuit, and non-electric circuit models, and compare their
forms for equivalency.
6.7.4. Hybrids
Recently, researchers have begun proposing hybrid approaches,
using multiple energy storage technologies together. A hybrid ultraca-
pacitor and battery storage system was proposed by Kim et al. (2017b)
in order to provide large scale regulation services. These services are
vital in maintaining grid stability, correcting for discrepancies between
power supply and demand Kim et al. (2017b). Their method intends to
lessen the use of batteries while increasing the profitability of regula-
tion services (Kim et al., 2017b). A model and optimization framework
for this system was derived, concluding that their system could result in
profit improvements at an order range of 1.16–5.44 (Kim et al., 2017b).
Akram and Khalid (2018) proposed a coordinated control scheme
for operating hybrid systems composed of both batteries and ultra-
capacitors. This approach was proposed since replacing conventional
generators with renewable energy generation sources could jeopardize
grid stability (Akram and Khalid, 2018). Considering investment, oper-
ation/maintenance, and replacement costs, the authors concluded that
their framework for the hybrid system ensures expected regulation of
frequencies without information losses, again resulting in increased
processes to regulation service providers (Akram and Khalid, 2018).
6.8. Energy efficiency
Minimizing energy losses in SG is an exceptionally important ob-
jective. Efficient power systems optimize transmission and distribution
systems, and effectively manage consumption. Table 6, seen below,
summarizes the papers examined in this section.
Aquino-Lugo and Overbye (2010) implemented decentralized con-
trol algorithms with agent-based technologies, aiming to minimize
power losses across distribution grids. They presented two case studies
for their optimal power flow (OPF) algorithm, analyzing their perfor-
mance for distributed systems (Aquino-Lugo and Overbye, 2010). Their
work concluded the validity of this control approach, but only with
the presence of intelligent communication methods (Aquino-Lugo and
Overbye, 2010).
Research from Ochoa and Harrison (2011) used a multi-period
alternative current OPF for determining the optimal accommodation
of renewable distributed generation (DG). Their method was aimed at
minimizing energy losses, also investigating trade-offs between more
generation capacity and energy losses. Their method was validated in
terms of optimality and loss reduction, citing simple implementation
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
in the majority of existing distribution networks (Ochoa and Harrison,
2011).
Atwa et al. (2010) proposed a method for allocating different cate-
gories of renewable DG units optimally, minimizing the annual energy
loss. This was applied to a common rural distribution system, including
constraints applied to the maximum penetration limit, the feeders’
capacity, voltage limits, and the discrete size of the available DG
units (Atwa et al., 2010). The authors concluded that for all scenarios
and renewable resource combinations studied, annual energy losses saw
significant reductions without violating constraints (Atwa et al., 2010).
7. Industry applications
At various levels of industry, there have been numerous successful
applications of SG across the globe. In this section, we examine how SG
has been implemented by academic institutions and large companies,
where small-scale prototypes or large-scale projects are constructed.
These applications have utilized the majority of topics we have outlined
in this survey, demonstrating the benefits of SG at the physical level,
at varying scales. Efforts such as these are crucial to maintaining SG
research endeavors where their increased efficiency and renewable
energy integration can be psychically quantified. As such, SG projects
are valuable to all levels of industry, enabling novel research. Projects
led by larger companies are however more advantageous for commu-
nities since they are implemented at city-wide scales, where typically
university led projects benefit the researchers and the institution. With-
out physical SG projects, research would not progress and traditional
power grids will remain stagnant against growing energy demands and
increased emissions. The impressive accomplishments of these projects
will be examined.
7.1. University/small scale implementation
7.1.1. Research/academic papers
Many universities across the world have laboratories dedicated to
researching SG, including Canadian Universities such as York Uni-
versity (York University Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, 2024), Toronto Metropolitan University (Toronto
Metropolitan University Centre for Urban Energy, 2024), and Uni-
versity of Waterloo (High Voltage Engineering Laboratory (HVEL),
2024), and the University of Melbourne in Australia (University of
Melourne Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 2024).
These laboratories have conducted a significant amount of research and
published numerous academic journals and surveys on various aspects
of SG. As the demand for a more sustainable method of delivering
energy increases, more research is dedicated to SG.
7.1.2. Prototypes
Alongside research and academic papers, prototypes of various
aspects of SG, such as demand side management (Supriya et al., 2011)
or remote monitoring (Natarajan and Bhagavath Singh, 2017), have
been created to design and test components of the SG. Small scale
grids are ideal for analysis and the testing of new technologies, where
their results are scalable and their effects on city-wide scales can be
extrapolated. More recently, larger scale, more complete prototypes
have been created by a select number of universities and companies.
A significant milestone in SG prototyping is the award-winning
Microgrid Energy Management System (MG-EMS) prototype. Located at
the Laboratory for Clean Energy Research (LaCER), School of Electrical
and Electric Engineering at Nanyang Technological University in Sin-
gapore, this prototype uses software applications for managing sensed
data and performing generation and load management routines (Cheah,
2024). By using NI LabVIEW software, CompactRIO hardware featuring
FPGA technology, and NI DAQ hardware, they extend the microgrid
to a SG prototype (Cheah, 2024). A maximum power point tracking
(MPPT) module of the PV system was created with this method, as
5776
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Table 6
Summary of REI challenges solution papers.
Year Reference Challenge Type Method
2020 Hewage et al.
(2021)
Accurate Weather
Forecasting
2010 Liserre et al.
(2010)
Synchronization A deep learning-based effective fine-grained
weather forecasting model which utilized multiple
layers that used surface weather parameters over a
period of time.
Zero crossing detection of the grid or using
multiple filters paired with a nonlinear
transformation
2018 Gandoman et al.
Power Quality Flexible AC Transmission Systems (FACTSs)
(2018)
2017 Ceaki et al.
(2017)
Harmonic disturbances
caused by solar and
electric vehicles
Connecting a passive filter in solar systems and
electric vehicle systems.
2019 Gope and Sikdar
(2019)
Forecasting Power
Demands
Private and lightweight masking-based spatial data
aggregation scheme.
2010 Kishore and
Snyder (2010)
Demand Management Optimization model for determining the time of
use of appliances and introduces an improved
powerful energy management controller (EMC)
optimization model that accounts for electric
potential capacity constraints.
2021 Tan et al. (2021) Energy Storage Examines and reviews various energy storage
technologies and their applications with renewable
energy integration.
2012 Pang et al.
(2012)
Energy Storage Using plug-in hybrid and battery-based electric
vehicles for storing energy, and strategy for
adopting these uses in vehicle-to-building mode.
2017 Kim et al.
(2017b)
Energy Storage Hybrid ultracapacitor and battery storage system
in order to provide large scale regulation.
2018 Akram and
Energy Storage Coordinated control scheme to operate a hybrid
Khalid (2018)
system composed of both batteries and
ultracapacitors.
2010 Aquino-Lugo and
Overbye (2010)
Energy Efficiency Agent based technologies for decentralized control
algorithm implementations, minimizing power
losses in the distribution grids.
2010 Atwa et al.
(2010)
Energy Efficiency Method applied to a common rural distribution
system for allocating different types of renewable
DG units optimally.
2011 Ochoa and
Energy Efficiency Multi-period alternative current optimal power
Harrison (2011)
flow for determining the optimal accommodation
of renewable distributed generation. Minimized
energy losses and investigated trade-offs between
those losses and increasing generation capacity.
well as a control scheme of the BESS to integrate energy management
systems for buildings (HEMS, BEMS), solar PV technology, and energy
storage with the existing microgrid prototype (Cheah, 2024).
Green Empowerment’s SGs for Small Grids project aims to bring
intelligent, open-source technology to engineers and technicians in
remote communities. They work with regional partners to build renew-
able energy micro-grids with remote indigenous communities in South
Asia (Green Empowerment, 2024). Green Empowerment also develops
and builds prototypes for lab testing with real-world appliances, com-
bines with simulated challenges. They work closely with their partners
to assess financial sustainability. In 2022 and 2023, they had the op-
portunity to test their prototype appliance controllers and monitoring
devices in Malaysia and the Philippines (Green Empowerment, 2024).
7.2. Country/continent implementations
Many countries around the world have also begun working on
the SG, whether working on pilot projects or taking initiatives for
testing and research. Governments of countries such as the United
States, Australia, Britain, China, Japan, and South Korea have also
considered SGs as a method of reducing carbon emissions and energy
security (Majeed Butt et al., 2021).
NIST is also devoting research and attention to the cooperation of
multiple countries for the development of international standards for
the SG (Wang and Lu, 2013). Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Japan, South
Korea, Australia, India, China are among the countries that have al-
ready or plan on investigating the substantial SG infrastructure (NIST,
2018), setting a baseline of energy standards that other countries will
soon follow in. The countries and continents examined in the following
section can be seen highlighted blue below in Fig. 7.
7.2.1. Australia
After a SG proposal in 2009, the Australian government was inter-
ested in investing $100 million. They were also interested in raising
customer awareness of energy utilization and establishing generation
management and distributed demand systems (Majeed Butt et al.,
2021). In New South Wales, five sites were chosen for SG establish-
ments and Energy Australia working with IBM, GE Energy, and Grid
Net, were selected to work on the project. The idea was to build
a Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access (WIMAX)-based
SG that had capabilities of automatic substations, able to support
up to 50,000 smart meter connections and to accommodate electric
vehicles (Majeed Butt et al., 2021).
Most recently in 2021, the Australian Energy Security Board pro-
posed an energy market redesign for 2025 (Energy Security Board,
2023). Built around the use of the SG and renewable energy sources,
they suggested an assortment of reforms necessary for the transition
to become the most decentralized power system in the world (En-
ergy Security Board, 2023). With reforms established and enforced,
5777
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
the benefits will be targeted towards consumers, enabling flexibility,
reliability, and affordability in Australia’s power grid (Energy Security
Board, 2023).
7.2.2. India
The Indian government has initiated nationwide SG projects, with
the primary goal of identifying and discussing the deployment bar-
riers and concerns, such as customer acceptance. Customers proved
willing to adopt SG and a mini SG project was implemented by the
Puducherry Electricity Department in Puducherry (National Smart Grid
Mission, 2024). This project had proposed an area covering 34,000
consumers from a wide variety of monthly incomes and electricity
usage, enabling each with advanced metering technologies (National
Smart Grid Mission, 2024). Many projects have been proposed and
implemented across India, in cities such as Ajmer, Tripura, Haryana,
and Manesar (National Smart Grid Mission, 2024). There are currently
12 total SG pilot projects in power distribution sectors listed, which
include the adoption of various functionalities, such as advanced me-
tering technologies, load management, substation automation including
SCADA, distribution transformer monitoring, distributed generation,
outage management, power quality measuring, micro grid, electric
vehicle charging infrastructure, home energy management center, and
cybersecurity and training infrastructure (National Smart Grid Mission,
2024).
7.2.3. United Kingdom
The UK has actively been decreasing greenhouse gas and carbon
dioxide emissions since 1990 (Cameron, 2022). Currently, the UK is
in the process of adopting the SG on a country-wide scale, with a
phased approach led by industry regulator Ofgem and the Department
of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) (Cameron, 2022). In 2021
alone, 8 million smart meters were installed and connected to the Data
Communications Company (DCC), who state their total 17 million units
at the time help in reducing 500,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide per
year (Cameron, 2022). Their goal is to implement 53 million smart me-
ters by 2025 and as of 2022, they published a report proposing reforms
for the energy market, digitizing the energy system and adopting novel
smart technology (Cameron, 2022). Ofgem’s proposed reforms aim to
provide consumers increased energy consumption authority, as well as
promoting net-zero green house gas emissions.
7.2.4. China
In September 2020, the Chinese government announced an objec-
tive of peak carbon dioxide emissions by 2030 and carbon neutrality
by 2060 (Globe Newswire, 2022). Since then, they have been trying
to build and improve their energy system (Globe Newswire, 2022).
China is expected to lead in terms of advanced metering infrastructure
deployment, as they have begun replacing their first generation of
smart meters with more advanced systems (Nhede, 2021).
Fig. 7. Regions examined in Section 7.2.
7.2.5. Canada
There are SG programs happening in several provinces and terri-
tories throughout Canada. The SG program, one of Natural Resource
Canada’s programs, funds $100M over four years (2019 to 2023) to
progress the demonstration of SG technologies and the deployment of
SG integrated systems (Government of Canada, 2023). During the four-
year program, recipients reported on the initial deployment of the grid
and its influence during their project up to 5 years following their
project investment (Government of Canada, 2023). The information
reported will be used by Natural Resource Canada to analyze grid
impacts and program future lessons to inform of future programs and
policy development. Currently, the SG program has funded 21 projects
across Canada working on development projects, deployment projects,
or hybrid projects, as seen in Fig. 8 (Government of Canada, 2023)
below.
Additionally, Canada’s Energy Innovation Program and Smart Grid
Demonstration provides funding to projects that demonstrate innova-
tions in smart grid solutions or technologies (Government of Canada,
2024). Having just closed its call for proposals this year, the project
promotes accelerating grid modernization, improving customer acces-
sibility, addressing market gaps, and advancing diversity, inclusively,
equity, and accessibility in this field (Government of Canada, 2024)
7.2.6. United States
The US DOE was provided with $4.5B from the Recovery Act for
the modernization of the power grid (U.S. Department of Energy,
2024b; U.S. Department of Energy, 2024). The two largest initiatives
are the SG Demonstration Program (SGDP) (U.S. Department of En-
ergy, 2024a) and the SG Investment Grant (SGIG) (U.S. Department
of Energy, 2024b; U.S. Department of Energy, 2024). The SGDP works
on advanced SG and energy storage systems and evaluates performance
for future applications. Overall consisting of 32 projects, 16 of those are
dedicated to regional demonstrations to prove validity, quantify costs,
and test scalable business models (U.S. Department of Energy, 2024a).
The other 16 projects is for the energy storage system development,
such as the ones discussed in the previous section. The SGIG focuses
on the accelerating the deployment of existing SG techniques, tools,
and technologies for improving modern grid performance, comprising
approximately $8B from the Act. The program involves 99 projects,
consisting of power supply companies, who upgrade their systems to
test distribution and transmission systems (U.S. Department of Energy,
2024b). There are also other SG programs such as ones for work train-
ing, interoperability and cybersecurity, and renewable and distributed
systems (U.S. Department of Energy, 2024).
7.2.7. Japan
In 2015, the Japanese government identified six portions vital to
accelerating the development and deployment of SG in the country.
5778
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Fig. 8. SG projects throughout Canada.
These key portions included smart meters as the most vital, along
with, communications technologies, solar PV, battery energy storage
systems, energy management systems, and the deregulation of the
electricity market (Nhede, 2021). The countries efforts towards SG
were accelerated amid hosting the 2020 Olympic games as they aimed
to ensure a secure energy supply. COVID-19 disruptions delayed the
countries’ SG plans, and so their efforts are projected to continue
through 2030 (Nhede, 2021). A book from Ida et al. outlines the current
economics of SGs in Japan, its developments, and the results of four
field experiments conducted in different regions (Ida et al., 2024). The
field experiments, performed in Kitakyushu city, Keihanna Science City,
Toyota city, and Yokohama city, were designed to be ‘‘randomized
control trials’’ on real power grids in residential areas (Ida et al., 2024).
The validity of the experiments is upheld by this random aspect, as well
as findings regarding behavioral economics and the use of large data
sets (Ida et al., 2024).
7.3. Observed constraints
Cost is one of the foremost constraints challenging the further
development and implementation of the SG (Young, 2017). There is
a significant cost associated with the distribution and transmission
systems, as well as the additional technologies and equipment, such
as smart meters. This will be an especially challenging constraint for
developing countries looking to implement the SG. A study done in
2017 by Young explored SG potential in these countries, calculating
the expected cost of SG and the ratio of the nation’s GDP to the cost of
development. They compared factors of available resources, proximity
to urban centers, the accessibility of education and training, political
stability, and development cost with Kepner–Tregoe analyses (Young,
2017). This study showed a large distribution of ratios, with the lowest
being 2 and the highest being 47, demonstrating the financial chal-
lenges of implementing SG and the determination of five developing
nations most compatible for investment in SGs (Young, 2017).
8. Conclusions
In this work, we provide a comprehensive overview of SG technol-
ogy, highlighting the current state of SG implementation through an
examination of research conducted by a variety of industrial, govern-
mental, and academic institutions. Emerging programs and standards
are also considered, which contribute to the modern effort in global SG
adoption. A new way of efficiently transmitting power, the SG offers
enhanced resiliency, flexibility, and reliability in power systems, adapt-
ing self-healing grid infrastructure, improving power management, and
better utilization of existing electricity assets. The SG is considerably
more environmentally friendly than its alternative standardized power
grid, providing a new solution to enable increased penetration of
renewable energy generation, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Distributors and customers also benefit from this technology econom-
ically, where SG integration implies an increase in available energy
sector employment and lower energy costs due to efficiency. From the
surveyed literature, it was evident that the challenges faced in SG are
numerous, requiring innovative solutions to reinforce its large-scale
viability. Here, we specifically focus on what were determined to be
the most critical issues, which are the challenges presented by cyberse-
curity, interoperability, and REI. These topics are examined thoroughly
in this survey, where their associated difficulties and proposed solutions
found in literature are discussed, serving as a reference to researchers
in the field.
The first issue facing SG that we study is cybersecurity. Due to the
close interaction of power distribution, consumption, generation, and
transmission in these systems, there is a high degree of communication
and therefore increased vulnerabilities to cyberattacks. Supervising
massive amounts of data and energy, SG exposed to cyberattacks
can have numerous consequences, including outages, infrastructure
failures, compromised privacy, and dangers to human safety. In inves-
tigating cybersecurity, the benefit lies in attack mitigation to maintain
essential functions. More sophisticated cyberattacks are being devel-
oped however, where one of them is the FDI class of attacks exam-
ined. One of the most prominent challenges in cybersecurity, more
research, testing, and simulations should be conducted to ensure the
proposed defense strategies provide high detection accuracy and re-
silience when integrated into SG. In research, the successes of data
driven and deep learning methods for attack identification/rectification
suggest that cybersecurity solutions involving such should be continued
to be pursued.
Interoperability in SGs was considered next, referring to the abil-
ity to exchange and make use of information. A main feature of
SG, it consists of the capacity of network technologies, sensors, and
electrical devices to use interchanged information effectively. Interop-
erability between all systems is required for effective grid operation
in this sense, ultimately resulting in improved reliability and opera-
tion protection through rapid dynamic and automatic communication.
5779
J. Powell et al.
Researching methods in improving interoperability for SG results in
grid transmission efficiency and stability, benefiting the environment
and transactional entities. Developing interoperability protocols and
maintaining their universal adherence is a challenge itself, especially
when considering SG on a national or international scale. Scalability
is a topic relating to interoperability that must be studied further.
Additionally, it is vital to develop improved interoperability testing,
where these tests are required to ensure that components are capable
of interoperability.
The third issue, renewable energy integration (REI), is of growing
importance for SG, as the demand for more renewable and sustainable
energy generation methods increases. SG allows for safe integration of
renewable energy resources into the grid and supplementing the power
supply with the power generated and stored by a consumer, reducing
dependencies on fossil fuels. Integrating these resources into the SG will
be necessary to meet the energy demand and environmental challenges
of the 21st century, offering benefits in reduced cost and environmental
impact. Utilizing these sources is challenging however, where its gen-
eration is incredibly variable, and the quantity of power generated is
greatly impacted by the weather forecast. The physical implementation
into SG is challenging as well, where considerations required include
grid geography, generator design, and power movement type. Develop-
ing methods of controlling REI complications and investigating energy
storage methods are crucial future research concerns. Energy storage is
necessary to ensure load demand is met at all times, especially given the
periodic and stochastic nature of renewable energy sources. New and
innovative methods of storage, especially the emerging V2G (vehicle-
to-grid) and V2X (vehicle-to-everything) methods should be further
explored, considering the growth of electric vehicles.
An abundance of research has been dedicated to the development of
SGs, either directly or indirectly. For instance, in the fields of renewable
resources and cybersecurity, more powerful and accurate methods of
generation and protection are constantly being developed, applicable to
many other applications outside the scope of SG. As new technologies
are developed, the problem of unifying them with the power grid or
maximizing functionality will always exist. The cost of the prospective
infrastructure reconfiguration is another one of the foremost constraints
challenging the further development and implementation of the SG,
making its adoption restrictive in developing countries.
Though existing portions of the SGs are well research and devel-
oped, the application of new research or modern problems must be
considered under the same scope. Provided the current state of climate
change and the digital age, areas that are likely to be explored more
in the future include cybersecurity, improving accuracy of forecasting,
micro-grid integration, and energy and demand management systems.
Considering current research in these areas and anomaly mitigation
and detection, it can be reasonably suggested that the utilization of
deep learning/large data sets will play a pivotal role in overcoming the
challenges of the future.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jadyn Powell: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Investigation,
Formal analysis. Alex McCafferty-Leroux: Writing – review & editing,
Visualization, Validation. Waleed Hilal: Writing – review & editing,
Supervision. S. Andrew Gadsden: Writing – review & editing, Super-
vision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada Discovery Grant (Gadsden).
References
Abdelhady, S., Osama, A., Shaban, A., Elbayoumi, M., 2020. A real-time optimization
of reactive power for an intelligent system using genetic algorithm. IEEE Access 8,
11991–12000. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2965321.
Abdelwahab, A., Lucia, W., Youssef, A., 2020. Set-theoretic control for active detection
of replay attacks with applications to smart grid. In: 2020 IEEE Conference on
Control Technology and Applications. CCTA, pp. 1004–1009. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/CCTA41146.2020.9206373.
Abujubbeh, M., Al-Turjman, F., Fahrioglu, M., 2019. Software-defined wireless sensor
networks in smart grids: An overview. Sustainable Cities Soc. 51, 101754. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2019.101754.
Akhtar, F., Rehmani, M.H., 2015. Energy replenishment using renewable and traditional
energy resources for sustainable wireless sensor networks: A review. Renew.
Sustain. Energy Rev. 45, 769–784. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.02.021.
Akram, U., Khalid, M., 2018. A coordinated frequency regulation framework based
on hybrid battery-ultracapacitor energy storage technologies. IEEE Access 6,
7310–7320. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2786283.
Alaerjan, A.S., 2021. Model-driven interoperability layer for normalized connectivity
across smart grid domains. IEEE Access 9, 98639–98653. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ACCESS.2021.3096043.
Alaerjan, A., Kim, D.-K., Ming, H., Malik, K., 2018. Using DDS based on unified
data model to improve interoperability of smart grids. In: 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Smart Energy Grid Engineering. SEGE, pp. 110–114. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/SEGE.2018.8499513.
Alenius, H., Luhtala, R., Messo, T., Roinila, T., 2020. Autonomous reactive power
support for smart photovoltaic inverter based on real-time grid-impedance mea-
surements of a weak grid. Electr. Power Syst. Res. 182, 106207. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.epsr.2020.106207.
Alotaibi, I., Abido, M.A., Khalid, M., Savkin, A.V., 2020. A comprehensive review
of recent advances in smart grids: A sustainable future with renewable energy
resources. Energies 13 (23), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en13236269.
Aloul, F., Al-Ali, A., Al-Dalky, R., Al-Mardini, M., El-Hajj, W., 2012. Smart grid security:
Threats, vulnerabilities and solutions. Int. J. Smart Grid Clean Energy 1 (1), 1–6.
Aquino-Lugo, A.A., Overbye, T., 2010. Agent technologies for control applications in
the power grid. In: 2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
pp. 1–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2010.43.
Ardagna, C.A., Bellandi, V., Damiani, E., Bezzi, M., Hebert, C., 2021. Big data analytics-
as-a-service: Bridging the gap between security experts and data scientists. Comput.
Electr. Eng. 93, 107215. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2021.107215.
Arduini, F., Lanzrath, M., Ghosalkar, S., Nateghi, A., Fisahn, S., Schaarschmidt, M.,
2023. Vulnerability of smart grid-enabled protection relays to IEMI. Adv. Radio
Sci. 20, 131–139. http://dx.doi.org/10.5194/ars-20-131-2023.
Arghandeh, R., Pipattanasomporn, M., Rahman, S., 2012. Flywheel energy storage
systems for ride-through applications in a facility microgrid. IEEE Trans. Smart
Grid 3 (4), 1955–1962. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2012.2212468.
Atwa, Y.M., El-Saadany, E.F., Salama, M.M.A., Seethapathy, R., 2010. Optimal renew-
able resources mix for distribution system energy loss minimization. IEEE Trans.
Power Syst. 25 (1), 360–370. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2009.2030276.
Avancini, D.B., Rodrigues, J.J., Martins, S.G., Rabêlo, R.A., Al-Muhtadi, J., Solic, P.,
2019. Energy meters evolution in smart grids: A review. J. Clean. Prod. 217,
702–715. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.01.229.
Ayadi, F., Colak, I., Bayindir, R., 2019. Interoperability in smart grid. In: 2019 7th
International Conference on Smart Grid. IcSmartGrid, pp. 165–169. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/icSmartGrid48354.2019.8990680.
Ayadi, F., Colak, I., Garip, I., Bulbul, H.I., 2020. Impacts of renewable energy resources
in smart grid. In: 2020 8th International Conference on Smart Grid. IcSmartGrid,
pp. 183–188. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/icSmartGrid49881.2020.9144695.
Badar, H.M.S., Mahmood, K., Akram, W., Ghaffar, Z., Umar, M., Das, A.K., 2023. Secure
authentication protocol for home area network in smart grid-based smart cities.
Comput. Electr. Eng. 108, 108721. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2023.
108721.
Baig, Z.A., Amoudi, A.-R., 2013. An analysis of smart grid attacks and countermeasures.
J. Commun. 8 (8), 473–479. http://dx.doi.org/10.12720/jcm.8.8.473-479.
Bani Ahmad, A.Y.A., William, P., Uike, D., Murgai, A., Bajaj, K.K., Deepak, A.,
Shrivastava, A., 2023. Framework for sustainable energy management using smart
grid panels integrated with machine learning and IOT based approach.. Int. J. Intell.
Syst. Appl. Eng. 12 (2s), 581–590.
Bansal, G., Dua, A., Aujla, G.S., Singh, M., Kumar, N., 2019. SmartChain: A smart and
scalable blockchain consortium for smart grid systems. In: 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Communications Workshops. ICC Workshops, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/ICCW.2019.8757069.
5780
J. Powell et al.
Bari, A., Jiang, J., Saad, W., Jaekel, A., 2014. Challenges in the smart grid applications:
An overview. Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw. 10 (2), 974682. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1155/2014/974682.
Bedi, G., Venayagamoorthy, G.K., Singh, R., Brooks, R.R., Wang, K.-C., 2018. Review of
Internet of Things (IoT) in electric power and energy systems. IEEE Internet Things
J. 5 (2), 847–870. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2802704.
Benzi, F., Anglani, N., Bassi, E., Frosini, L., 2011. Electricity smart meters interfacing
the households. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 58 (10), 4487–4494. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/TIE.2011.2107713.
Bergmann, H., Mosiman, C., Saha, A., Haile, S., Livingood, W., Bushby, S., Fierro, G.,
Bender, J., Poplawski, M., Granderson, J., Pritoni, M., 2020. Semantic interoper-
ability to enable smart, grid-interactive efficient buildings. Summer Study Energy
Effic. Build. http://dx.doi.org/10.20357/B7S304.
Berl, A., Niedermeier, M., Meer, H., 2013. Smart grid considerations: Energy efficiency
vs. Security. In: Green and Sustainable Computing: Part II. In: Advances in
Computers, vol. 88, Elsevier, pp. 159–198. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
407725-6.00004-6.
Bitar, E., Khargonekar, P., Poolla, K., 2011. Systems and control opportunities in
the integration of renewable energy into the smart grid. IFAC Proc. Vol. 44 (1),
4927–4932. http://dx.doi.org/10.3182/20110828-6-IT-1002.01244.
Blumsack, S., Fernandez, A., 2012. Ready or not, here comes the smart grid! Energy
7th Bienn. Int. Workshop Adv. Energy Stud. 37 (1), 61–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.energy.2011.07.054.
Bossanyi, E., Saad-Saoud, Z., Jenkins, N., 1998. Prediction of flicker produced by
wind turbines. Wind Energy 1 (1), 35–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-
1824(199809)1:1<35::AID-WE11>3.0.CO;2-J.
Camacho, E.F., Samad, T., Garcia-Sanz, M., Hiskens, I., 2011. Control for renewable
energy and smart grids. Impact Control Technol. Control Syst. Soc. 4 (8), 69–88.
Cameron, A., 2022. The UK smart grid: How it started & how it’s going. Fortra
Available from: https://www.tripwire.com/state-of-security/uk-smart-grid-how-it-
started-how-its-going#:~:text=In%20their%20extensive%20document%2C%20the,
system%20for%20transporting%20electricity%20from.
Caribbean Renewable EnergyDevelopment Programme (CREDP), 2004. Wind-grid
integration brief. Sol. Water Heat. Mark..
Cartwright, P., 2006. Connecting renewables: The challenge of integrating large offshore
wind farms. Refocus 7 (1), 24–26. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1471-0846(06)
70513-3.
Cavalieri, S., 2021. Semantic interoperability between IEC 61850 and oneM2M for
IoT-enabled smart grids. Sensors 21 (7), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s21072571.
Ceaki, O., Seritan, G., Vatu, R., Mancasi, M., 2017. Analysis of power quality
improvement in smart grids. In: 2017 10th International Symposium on Advanced
Topics in Electrical Engineering. ATEE, pp. 797–801. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ATEE.2017.7905104.
Chamandoust, H., Hashemi, A., Bahramara, S., 2021. Energy management of a smart
autonomous electrical grid with a hydrogen storage system. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy
46 (34), 17608–17626. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.02.174.
Chandrasekaran, K., Selvaraj, J., Amaladoss, C.R., Veerapan, L., 2021. Hybrid renewable
energy based smart grid system for reactive power management and voltage profile
enhancement using artificial neural network. Energy Sources Part A Recovery
Util. Environ. Eff. 43 (19), 2419–2442. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15567036.2021.
1902430.
Cheah, P., 2024. Developing a functional smart grid prototype using NI LabVIEW, NI
CompactRIO, and NI DAQ. Available from: https://www.ni.com/en-ca/innovations/
case-studies/19/developing-a-functional-smart-grid-prototype.html.
Chen, N., 2013. Passive Interoperability Testing for Communication Protocols (Ph.D.
thesis). (2013REN1S046), Université de Rennes, URL https://theses.hal.science/tel-
00869819.
Chen, J., Mohamed, M.A., Dampage, U., Rezaei, M., Salmen, S.H., Obaid, S.A., An-
nuk, A., 2021. A multi-layer security scheme for mitigating smart grid vulnerability
against faults and cyber-attacks. Appl. Sci. 11 (21), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
app11219972.
Chetan Khadse, A.A.P., Chaudhari, B.S., 2021. Electromagnetic field and artificial
intelligence based fault detection and classification system for the transmission
lines in smart grid. Energy Sources Part A Recovery Util. Environ. Eff. 1–15.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15567036.2021.1948637.
Chim, T., Yiu, S., Hui, L.C., Li, V.O., 2011. PASS: Privacy-preserving authentication
scheme for smart grid network. In: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Smart
Grid Communications. SmartGridComm, pp. 196–201. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
SmartGridComm.2011.6102316.
Choi, T.-I., Lee, K.Y., Lee, D.R., Ahn, J.K., 2008. Communication system for distribution
automation using CDMA. IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 23 (2), 650–656. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/TPWRD.2007.910991.
Colak, A.M., Kayisli, K., 2021. Reducing voltage and frequency fluctuations in power
systems using smart power electronics technologies: A review. In: 2021 9th
International Conference on Smart Grid. IcSmartGrid, pp. 197–200. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/icSmartGrid52357.2021.9551248.
Colak, I., Sagiroglu, S., Fulli, G., Yesilbudak, M., Covrig, C.-F., 2016. A survey on
the critical issues in smart grid technologies. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 54 (C),
396–405. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.10.03.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Colson, C.M., et al., 2012. Towards Real-Time Power Management of Microgrids for
Power System Integration: a Decentralized Multi-Agent Based Approach (Ph.D.
thesis). Montana State University-Bozeman, College of Engineering.
Commission, I.E., et al., 2012. Grid Integration of Large-Capacity Renewable En-
ergy Sources and Use of Large-Capacity Electrical Energy Storage. International
Electrotechnical Commission.
Cunjiang, Y., Huaxun, Z., Lei, Z., 2012. Architecture design for smart grid. Energy
Procedia 2012 Int. Conf. Future Electr. Power Energy Syst. 17, 1524–1528. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2012.02.276.
DeCesaro, J., Porter, K., Milligan, M., 2009. Wind energy and power system operations:
A review of wind integration studies to date. Electr. J. 22 (10), 34–43. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tej.2009.10.010.
Delgado-Gomes, V., Martins, J.F., Lima, C., Borza, P.N., 2015. Smart grid security issues.
In: 2015 9th International Conference on Compatibility and Power Electronics. CPE,
pp. 534–538. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CPE.2015.7231132.
Demertzis, K., Tsiknas, K., Taketzis, D., Skoutas, D.N., Skianis, C., Iliadis, L., Zoiros, K.E.,
2021. Communication network standards for smart grid infrastructures. Network 1
(2), 132–145. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/network1020009.
Department of Energy, 2016. Distribution Automation: Results from the Smart Grid
Investment Grant Program. Tech. rep., United States Department of Energy.
Department of Energy and Climate Change, 2009. The UK Renewable Energy Strategy.
Tech. rep., The HM Government, United Kingdom.
di Bisceglie, M., Galdi, C., Vaccaro, A., Villacci, D., 2009. Cooperative sensor networks
for voltage quality monitoring in smart grids. In: 2009 IEEE Bucharest PowerTech.
pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/PTC.2009.5282012.
Dileep, G., 2020. A survey on smart grid technologies and applications. Renew. Energy
146, 2589–2625. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.08.092.
Durand, J., 2012. Conformance interoperability and portability testing: Proposed
procedures and practices.
El-hajj, M., Fadlallah, A., Chamoun, M., Serhrouchni, A., 2019. A survey of Internet
of Things (IoT) authentication schemes. Sensors 19 (5), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
s19051141, URL https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/19/5/1141.
El-Tamaly, H.H., Wahab, M.A., Kasem, A.H., 2007. Simulation of directly grid-connected
wind turbines for voltage fluctuation evaluation. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 2 (1), 15–30.
Electricity Advisory Committee, 2008a. Smart Grid: Enabler of the New Energy
Economy. Tech. rep., United States Department of Energy, Washington, D.C.
Electricity Advisory Committee, 2008b. Smart Grid: An Introduction. Tech. rep., United
States Department of Energy, Washington, D.C.
Eltigani, D., Masri, S., 2015. Challenges of integrating renewable energy sources to
smart grids: A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 52, 770–780. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.07.140.
Energy, G., et al., 2010. Western Wind and Solar Integration Study. Tech. rep., National
Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Energy Great Lakes Regional Wind, 2010. Eastern Wind Integration and Transmission
Study. Technical Report, National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).
Energy Sector Control Systems Working Group, 2011. Roadmap to Achieve Energy
Delivery Systems Cybersecurity. Tech. rep., United States Department of Energy,
Washington, D.C.
Energy Security Board, 2023. Post 2025 electricity market design. Available from:
https://esb-post2025-market-design.aemc.gov.au/.
Enescu, D., Chicco, G., Porumb, R., Seritan, G., 2020. Thermal energy storage for grid
applications: Current status and emerging trends. Energies 13 (2), http://dx.doi.
org/10.3390/en13020340.
Fadaeenejad, M., Saberian, A., Fadaee, M., Radzi, M., Hizam, H., AbKadir, M., 2014.
The present and future of smart power grid in developing countries. Renew. Sustain.
Energy Rev. 29, 828–834. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.08.072.
Faheem, M., Kuusniemi, H., Eltahawy, B., Bhutta, M.S., Raza, B., 2024. A lightweight
smart contracts framework for blockchain-based secure communication in smart
grid applications. IET Gener. Transm. Distrib. 18 (3), 625–638. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1049/gtd2.13103.
Fang, X., Misra, S., Xue, G., Yang, D., 2012. Smart grid — The new and improved
power grid: A survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 14 (4), 944–980. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/SURV.2011.101911.00087.
Faraji, H., Vahidi, B., Khorsandi, A., Hossein Hosseinian, S., 2024. Multiple control
strategies for smart photovoltaic inverter under network voltage fluctuations and
islanded operation. Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 156, 109723. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijepes.2023.109723.
Farhangi, H., 2010. The path of the smart grid. IEEE Power Energy Mag. 8, 18–28.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MPE.2009.934876.
Farrokhabadi, M., Solanki, B.V., Canizares, C.A., Bhattacharya, K., Koenig, S.,
Sauter, P.S., Leibfried, T., Hohmann, S., 2017. Energy storage in microgrids:
Compensating for generation and demand fluctuations while providing ancillary
services. IEEE Power Energy Mag. 15 (5), 81–91. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MPE.
2017.2708863.
Feng, S., Haykin, S., 2019. Cognitive risk control for anti-jamming V2V communications
in autonomous vehicle networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 68 (10), 9920–9934.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2019.2935999.
Feng, Z., Yuexia, Z., 2011. Study on smart grid communications system based on new
generation wireless technology. In: 2011 International Conference on Electronics,
Communications and Control. ICECC, pp. 1673–1678. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ICECC.2011.6066343.
5781
J. Powell et al.
Fouda, M.M., Fadlullah, Z.M., Kato, N., Lu, R., Shen, X.S., 2011. A lightweight message
authentication scheme for smart grid communications. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2
(4), 675–685. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2011.2160661.
Gandoman, F.H., Ahmadi, A., Sharaf, A.M., Siano, P., Pou, J., Hredzak, B., Age-
lidis, V.G., 2018. Review of FACTS technologies and applications for power quality
in smart grids with renewable energy systems. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 82,
502–514. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2017.09.062.
Gao, J., Asamoah, K.O., Sifah, E.B., Smahi, A., Xia, Q., Xia, H., Zhang, X., Dong, G.,
2018. GridMonitoring: Secured sovereign blockchain based monitoring on smart
grid. IEEE Access 6, 9917–9925. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2806303.
Gao, J., Zhang, X., Liang, H., Shen, X.S., 2014. Joint encryption and compressed sensing
in smart grid data transmission. In: 2014 IEEE Global Communications Conference.
pp. 662–667. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GLOCOM.2014.7036883.
Gaviano, A., Weber, K., Dirmeier, C., 2012. Challenges and integration of PV and wind
energy facilities from a smart grid point of view. Energy Procedia 25, 118–125.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2012.07.016.
Gelazanskas, L., Gamage, K., 2013. Demand side management in smart grid: A review
and proposals for future direction. Sustainable Cities Soc. 11, http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.scs.2013.11.001.
Ghaffari, A., Askarzadeh, A., Fadaeinedjad, R., Siano, P., 2024. Mitigation of total
harmonic distortion and flicker emission in the presence of harmonic loads by
optimal siting and sizing of wind turbines and energy storage systems. J. Energy
Storage 86, 111312. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2024.111312.
Ginocchi, M., Ahmadifar, A., Ponci, F., Monti, A., 2020. Application of a smart grid
interoperability testing methodology in a real-time hardware-in-the-loop testing
environment. Energies 13 (7), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en13071648.
Globe Newswire, 2022. Global and China smart meters market report 2022–2027:
Growing number of households spurs demand. Res. Mark. Available from:
https://www.globenewswire.com/en/news-release/2022/08/02/2490054/28124/
en/Global-and-China-Smart-Meters-Market-Report-2022-2027-_Growing-Number-
of-Households-Spurs-Demand.html.
Goldstein, A., 2017. Advanced Electrical Power System Sensors Workshop Report.
Special Publication (NIST SP), National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD, http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1500-11.
Gope, P., Sikdar, B., 2019. Lightweight and privacy-friendly spatial data aggregation
for secure power supply and demand management in smart grids. IEEE Trans.
Inf. Forensics Secur. 14 (6), 1554–1566. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2018.
2881730.
Government of Canada, 2023. Smart grid program. Green Infrastruct. Programs
URL https://natural-resources.canada.ca/climate-change/green-infrastructure-
programs/smart-grids/19793.
Government of Canada, 2024. Energy innovation program smart grid demonstration
call for proposals. https://natural-resources.canada.ca/science-and-data/funding-
partnerships/opportunities/grants-incentives/energy-innovation-program/energy-
innovation-program-smart-grid-demonstration-call-for-proposals/energy-
innovation-program-smart. (Accessed 13 January 2024).
Green Empowerment, 2024. Smart grids for small grids. Available from: https://
greenempowerment.org/technical-resources/smart-grid-for-small-grids/.
Gunduz, M.Z., Das, R., 2018. Internet of things (IoT): Evolution, components and
applications fields. Pamukkale Eniversity J. Eng. Sci..
Gündüz, M., Das, R., 2018a. Analysis of cyber-attacks on smart grid applications. In:
2018 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Data Processing. IDAP,
pp. 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IDAP.2018.8620728.
Gündüz, M.Z., Das, R., 2018b. A comparison of cyber-security oriented testbeds for
IoT-based smart grids. In: 2018 6th International Symposium on Digital Forensic
and Security. ISDFS, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISDFS.2018.8355329.
Gunduz, M., Das, R., 2020. Cyber-security on smart grid: Threats and poten-
tial solutions. Comput. Netw. 169 (C), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2019.
107094.
Gungor, V.C., Lu, B., Hancke, G.P., 2010. Opportunities and challenges of wireless
sensor networks in smart grid. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 57 (10), 3557–3564.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2009.2039455.
He, Y., Mendis, G.J., Wei, J., 2017. Real-time detection of false data injection attacks
in smart grid: A deep learning-based intelligent mechanism. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid
8 (5), 2505–2516. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2017.2703842.
Hegazy, O., 2012. Advanced Power Electronics Interface and Optimization for Fuel Cell
Hybrid Electric Vehicles Applications (Ph.D. thesis). Vrije Universiteit Brussel.
Hentea, M., 2021. Building an Effective Security Program for Distributed Energy
Resources and Systems. John Wiley & Sons.
Hewage, P., Trovati, M., Pereira, E., Behera, A., 2021. Deep learning-based effective
fine-grained weather forecasting model. Pattern Anal. Appl. 24 (1), 343–366.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10044-020-00898-1.
High Voltage Engineering Laboratory (HVEL), 2024. Smart grid. https://uwaterloo.
ca/high-voltage-engineering-laboratory/research/smart-grid. (Accessed 13 January
2024).
Hledik, R., 2009. How green is the smart grid? Electr. J. 22 (3), 29–41.
Ida, T., Tanaka, M., Ito, K., 2024. Smart Grid Economics: A Field Experimental
Approach to Demand Response, vol. 32, Springer Nature.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
IE.E.E. Standards Association, 2012. IEEE standard for electric power systems
communications-distributed network protocol (DNP3). In: IEEE Std 1815-2012
(Revision of IEEE Std 1815-2010). pp. 1–821. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IEEESTD.
2012.6327578.
Jadidi, S., Badihi, H., Zhang, Y., 2023. Active fault-tolerant and attack-resilient control
for a renewable microgrid against power-loss faults and data integrity attacks. IEEE
Trans. Cybern. 1–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2023.3305240.
Jin, D., Nicol, D.M., Yan, G., 2011. An event buffer flooding attack in DNP3 controlled
SCADA systems. In: Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation Conference. WSC,
pp. 2614–2626. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WSC.2011.6147969.
Joga, S.R.K., Sinha, P., Paul, K., Sahoo, S., Pani, S.R., Dei, G., Ustun, T.S., 2024.
Identification of harmonic sources in smart grid using systematic feature extraction
from non-active powers. Front. Smart Grids 3, http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/frsgr.
2024.1338774.
Jokar, P., Leung, V.C.M., 2018. Intrusion detection and prevention for ZigBee-based
home area networks in smart grids. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 9 (3), 1800–1811.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2016.2600585.
Judge, M.A., Khan, A., Manzoor, A., Khattak, H.A., 2022. Overview of smart grid im-
plementation: Frameworks, impact, performance and challenges. J. Energy Storage
49, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.104056.
Kawoosa, A.I., Prashar, D., 2021. A review of cyber securities in smart grid technology.
In: 2021 2nd International Conference on Computation, Automation and Knowledge
Management. ICCAKM, pp. 151–156. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCAKM50778.
2021.9357698.
Khadem, S.K., Basu, M., Conlon, M., 2010. Power quality in grid connected renewable
energy systems: Role of custom power devices. In: International Conference on
Renewable Energies and Power Quality. Granada.
Khelifa, B., Abla, S., 2015. Security concerns in smart grids: Threats, vulnerabilities
and countermeasures. In: 2015 3rd International Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Conference. IRSEC, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IRSEC.2015.7454963.
Khurana, H., Hadley, M., Lu, N., Frincke, D., 2010. Smart-grid security issues. IEEE
Secur. Priv. 8, 81–85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2010.49.
Kim, D.-K., Alaerjan, A., Lu, L., Yang, H., Jang, H., 2017a. Toward interoperability
of smart grids. IEEE Commun. Mag. 55 (8), 204–210. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
MCOM.2017.1600392.
Kim, H.J., Jeong, C.M., Sohn, J.-M., Joo, J.-Y., Donde, V., Ko, Y., Yoon, Y.T., 2020. A
comprehensive review of practical issues for interoperability using the common
information model in smart grids. Energies 13 (6), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
en13061435.
Kim, Y., Raghunathan, V., Raghunathan, A., 2017b. Design and management of battery-
supercapacitor hybrid electrical energy storage systems for regulation services. IEEE
Trans. Multi-Scale Comput. Syst. 3 (1), 12–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TMSCS.
2016.2627543.
King, T., 2018. Sensing & Measurement Research Activities. Department of Energy, Grid
Moderization Laboratory Consortium, pp. 1–23.
Kishore, S., Snyder, L.V., 2010. Control mechanisms for residential electricity de-
mand in SmartGrids. In: 2010 First IEEE International Conference on Smart
Grid Communications. pp. 443–448. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SMARTGRID.2010.
5622084.
Kitsios, A., Bousakas, K., Salame, T., Bogno, B., Papageorgas, P., Vokas, G., Mauffay, F.,
Petit, P., Aillerie, M., Charles, J.-P., 2017. Renewable energy sources, the internet of
things and the third industrial revolution: Smart grid and contemporary information
and communication technologies. In: Technologies and Materials for Renewable
Energy, Environment and Sustainability. In: AIP Conference Proceedings, vol. 1814,
020070. http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.4976289.
Kumar, N.A., Daniel, R., Pasam, P.K., 2024. A novel electrical load forecasting model
using a deep learning approach. In: The Internet of Energy: A Pragmatic Approach
Towards Sustainable Development. CRC Press, p. 67.
Kumar, P., Kumar, R., Aljuhani, A., Javeed, D., Jolfaei, A., Islam, A.K.M.N., 2023.
Digital twin-driven SDN for smart grid: A deep learning integrated blockchain for
cybersecurity. Sol. Energy 263, 111921. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2023.
111921.
Kumari, A., Gupta, R., Tanwar, S., Tyagi, S., Kumar, N., 2020. When blockchain meets
smart grid: Secure energy trading in demand response management. IEEE Netw.
34 (5), 299–305. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.001.1900660.
Kuwałek, P., 2021. Selective identification and localization of voltage fluctuation
sources in power grids. Energies 14 (20), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en14206585,
URL https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/14/20/6585.
Larcom, J.A., Liu, H., 2013. Modeling and characterization of GPS spoofing. In: 2013
IEEE International Conference on Technologies for Homeland Security. HST, pp.
729–734. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/THS.2013.6699094.
Lee, E.-K., Gerla, M., Oh, S.Y., 2012. Physical layer security in wireless smart grid. IEEE
Commun. Mag. 50 (8), 46–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2012.6257526.
Leon, R., Vittal, V., Manimaran, G., 2007. Application of sensor network for secure
electric energy infrastructure. IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 22 (2), 1021–1028. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPWRD.2006.886797.
Li, H., Gong, S., Lai, L., Han, Z., Qiu, R.C., Yang, D., 2012. Efficient and secure wireless
communications for advanced metering infrastructure in smart grids. IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid 3 (3), 1540–1551. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2012.2203156.
5782
J. Powell et al.
Linh, N.T., 2009. Power quality investigation of grid connected wind turbines. In: 2009
4th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications. pp. 2218–2222.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICIEA.2009.5138593.
Liserre, M., Sauter, T., Hung, J.Y., 2010. Future energy systems: Integrating renewable
energy sources into the smart power grid through industrial electronics. IEEE Ind.
Electron. Mag. 4 (1), 18–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2010.935861.
Liu, F., Dong, T., Liu, Q., Liu, Y., Li, S., 2024. Combining fuzzy clustering and improved
long short-term memory neural networks for short-term load forecasting. Electr.
Power Syst. Res. 226, 109967. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.epsr.2023.109967.
Liu, H., Gu, T., Liu, Y., Song, J., Zeng, Z., 2020. Fault-tolerant privacy-preserving data
aggregation for smart grid. Wirel. Commun. Mob. Comput. 2020, http://dx.doi.
org/10.1155/2020/8810393.
Liu, Y., Ning, P., Dai, H., Liu, A., 2010. Randomized differential DSSS: Jamming-
resistant wireless broadcast communication. In: 2010 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM.
pp. 1–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/INFCOM.2010.5462156.
Liu, Y., Ning, P., Reiter, M.K., 2011. False data injection attacks against state estimation
in electric power grids. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur. 14 (1), http://dx.doi.org/10.
1145/1952982.1952995.
Lu, Z., Wang, W., Wang, C., 2011. From jammer to gambler: Modeling and detection of
jamming attacks against time-critical traffic. In: 2011 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM.
pp. 1871–1879. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/INFCOM.2011.5934989.
Ma, R., Chen, H.-H., Huang, Y.-R., Meng, W., 2013. Smart grid communication: Its
challenges and opportunities. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 4 (1), 36–46. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/TSG.2012.2225851.
Ma, L., Chu, Z., Yang, C., Wang, G., Dai, W., 2023. Recursive watermarking-based
transient covert attack detection for the industrial CPS. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics
Secur. 18, 1709–1719. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2023.3251857.
Mahmood, A., Khan, A., Anjum, A., Maple, C., Jeon, G., 2023. An efficient and privacy-
preserving blockchain-based secure data aggregation in smart grids. Sustain. Energy
Technol. Assess. 60, 103414. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2023.103414.
Majeed Butt, O., Zulqarnain, M., Majeed Butt, T., 2021. Recent advancement in smart
grid technology: Future prospects in the electrical power network. Ain Shams Eng.
J. 12 (1), 687–695. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asej.2020.05.004.
Mak, S.T., 2010. Sensor data output requirements for Smart Grid applications. In: IEEE
PES General Meeting. pp. 1–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/PES.2010.5589580.
Marcos, J., Marroyo, L., Lorenzo, E., Alvira, D., Izco, E., 2011. Power output fluctuations
in large scale pv plants: One year observations with one second resolution and
a derived analytic model. Prog. Photovolt., Res. Appl. 19 (2), 218–227. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1002/pip.1016.
Markovic, D.S., Zivkovic, D., Branovic, I., Popovic, R., Cvetkovic, D., 2013. Smart
power grid and cloud computing. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 24, 566–577.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.03.068.
Masoum, M.A., Fuchs, E.F., 2015. Introduction to power quality. In: Masoum, M.A.,
Fuchs, E.F. (Eds.), Power Quality in Power Systems and Electrical Machines,
second ed. Academic Press, Boston, pp. 1–104. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-12-800782-2.00001-4, (Chapter 1).
Mengelkamp, E., Notheisen, B., Beer, C., Dauer, D., Weinhardt, C., 2018. A blockchain-
based smart grid: towards sustainable local energy markets. Comput. Sci. Res. Dev.
33 (1), 207–214. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00450-017-0360-9.
Metke, A.R., Ekl, R.L., 2010. Security technology for smart grid networks. IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid 1 (1), 99–107. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2010.2046347.
Ming, Z., Lixin, H., Fan, Y., Danwei, J., 2010. Retracted article: Research of the
problems of renewable energy orderly combined to the grid in smart grid. In:
2010 Asia-Pacific Power and Energy Engineering Conference. pp. 1–4. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/APPEEC.2010.5448334.
Mirkovic, J., Reiher, P., 2004. A taxonomy of DDoS attack and DDoS defense
mechanisms. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 34 (2), 39–53. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1145/997150.997156.
Mohagheghi, S., Stoupis, J., Wang, Z., 2009. Communication protocols and networks
for power systems-current status and future trends. In: 2009 IEEE/PES Power
Systems Conference and Exposition. pp. 1–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/PSCE.2009.
4840174.
Mohamed, M.A., Eltamaly, A.M., Farh, H.M., Alolah, A.I., 2015. Energy management
and renewable energy integration in smart grid system. In: 2015 IEEE International
Conference on Smart Energy Grid Engineering. SEGE, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/SEGE.2015.7324621.
Mollah, M.B., Zhao, J., Niyato, D., Lam, K.-Y., Zhang, X., Ghias, A.M.Y.M., Koh, L.H.,
Yang, L., 2021. Blockchain for future smart grid: A comprehensive survey. IEEE
Internet Things J. 8 (1), 18–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2020.2993601.
Moretti, M., Djomo, S.N., Azadi, H., May, K., De Vos, K., Van Passel, S., Witters, N.,
2017. A systematic review of environmental and economic impacts of smart grids.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 68, 888–898. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.
03.039.
Moura, J., 2009. Accommodating high levels of variable generation. In: The Canadian
Wind Energy Association’s 2009 Wind Matters Conference.
Mrabet, Z.E., Kaabouch, N., Ghazi, H.E., Ghazi, H.E., 2018. Cyber-security in smart
grid: Survey and challenges. Comput. Electr. Eng. 67, 469–482. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.compeleceng.2018.01.015.
Muthukumaran, E., Kalyani, S., 2021. Development of smart controller for demand side
management in smart grid using reactive power optimization. Soft Comput. 25 (2),
1581–1594. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00500-020-05246-3.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Natarajan, K.P., Bhagavath Singh, S., 2017. FPGA based remote monitoring system in
smart grids. Indian J. Sci. Technol. 10, 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.17485/ijst/2017/
v10i5/108829.
Nateghi, A., Schaarschmidt, M., Fisahn, S., Garbe, H., 2021. Vulnerability of wireless
smart meter to electromagnetic interference sweep frequency jamming signals.
In: 2021 IEEE International Joint EMC/SI/PI and EMC Europe Symposium. pp.
755–759. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/EMC/SI/PI/EMCEurope52599.2021.9559200.
National Smart Grid Mission, 2024. SG projects. Ministry of Power, Government of
India, 17 March 2023. Available from: https://www.nsgm.gov.in/en/sg-pilot.
Nhede, N., 2021. Smart grid’s role in energy transition and the top five market
leaders. Smart Energy Int. https://www.smart-energy.com/industry-sectors/smart-
meters/smart-grids-role-in-energy-transition-and-the-top-five-market-leaders/.
NIST, 2010. NIST Framework and Roadmap for Smart Grid Interoperability Standards,
Release 1.0. Special Publication (NIST SP), National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Gaithersburg, MD.
NIST, 2018. Smart grid international coordination. https://www.nist.gov/programs-
projects/smart-grid-national-coordination/international-coordination. (Accessed 07
November 2023).
Ochoa, L.F., Harrison, G.P., 2011. Minimizing energy losses: Optimal accommodation
and smart operation of renewable distributed generation. IEEE Trans. Power Syst.
26 (1), 198–205. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2010.2049036.
Office of Electric Transmission and Distribution, 2003. Grid 20230 - A National Vision
for Electricity’s Second 100 Years. Tech. rep., United States Department of Energy,
Washington, D.C.
Oozeer, M.I., Haykin, S., 2019a. Cognitive dynamic system for control and cyber-attack
detection in smart grid. IEEE Access 7, 78320–78335. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2019.2922410.
Oozeer, M.I., Haykin, S., 2019b. Cognitive risk control for mitigating cyber-attack in
smart grid. IEEE Access 7, 125806–125826. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.
2019.2939089.
Ourahou, M., Ayrir, W., Hassouni, B.E., Haddi, A., 2020. Review on smart grid control
and reliability in presence of renewable energies: Challenges and prospects. Math.
Comput. Simulation 167, 19–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.matcom.2018.11.009.
Panda, D.K., Das, S., 2021. Smart grid architecture model for control, optimization and
data analytics of future power networks with more renewable energy. J. Clean.
Prod. 301, 126877. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126877.
Pandey, R.K., Misra, M., 2016. Cyber security threats — Smart grid infrastructure. In:
2016 National Power Systems Conference. NPSC, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/NPSC.2016.7858950.
Pang, C., Dutta, P., Kezunovic, M., 2012. BEVs/PHEVs as dispersed energy storage
for V2B uses in the smart grid. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 3 (1), 473–482. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2011.2172228.
Papaioannou, I., et al., 2018. Smart grid interoperability testing methodology. In: JRC
Publications Repository. Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg
(Luxembourg), http://dx.doi.org/10.2760/08049.
Paramo, G., Bretas, A., Meyn, S., 2022. Research trends and applications of PMUs.
Energies 15 (15), http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en15155329.
Paul, S., Rabbani, M., Kundu, R., Zaman, S., 2014. A review of smart technology (Smart
Grid) and its features. In: Proceedings of 2014 1st International Conference on
Non Conventional Energy. ICONCE 2014, pp. 200–203. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ICONCE.2014.6808719.
Pavithra, L., Rekha, D., 2021. Prevention of replay attack for isolated smart grid. In:
Next Generation Information Processing System. Springer Singapore, Singapore, pp.
251–258.
Pendarakis, D., Shrivastava, N., Liu, Z., Ambrosio, R., 2007. Information aggregation
and optimized actuation in sensor networks: Enabling smart electrical grids.
In: IEEE INFOCOM 2007 - 26th IEEE International Conference on Computer
Communications. pp. 2386–2390. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/INFCOM.2007.286.
Peng, C., Sun, H., Yang, M., Wang, Y.-L., 2019. A survey on security communication
and control for smart grids under malicious cyber attacks. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man
Cybern. Syst. 49 (8), 1554–1569. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSMC.2018.2884952.
Popper, C., Strasser, M., Capkun, S., 2009. Jamming-resistant broadcast communication
without shared keys. In: USENIX Security Symposium. pp. 231–248.
Premaratne, U.K., Samarabandu, J., Sidhu, T.S., Beresh, R., Tan, J.-C., 2010. An
intrusion detection system for IEC61850 automated substations. IEEE Trans. Power
Deliv. 25 (4), 2376–2383. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPWRD.2010.2050076.
Rajesh, C., Meenalochini, P., Kannaiah, S.K., Bindu, A., 2024. A hybrid control topology
for cascaded H-bridge multilevel inverter to improve the power quality of smart
grid connected system: NBO-RERNN approach. Expert Syst. Appl. 238, 122054.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122054.
Rajfallovska, A., 2016. Green telecommunications in smart grid. Int. At. Energy Agency.
Ranjan, S., Swaminathan, R., Uysal, M., Nucci, A., Knightly, E., 2009. DDoS-shield:
DDoS-resilient scheduling to counter application layer attacks. IEEE/ACM Trans.
Netw. 17 (1), 26–39. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TNET.2008.926503.
Rawat, D.B., Bajracharya, C., 2015. Cyber security for smart grid systems: Status,
challenges, and perspectives. In: SoutheastCon 2015. pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/SECON.2015.7132891.
Razzak, A., Islam, M.T., Roy, P., Razzaque, M.A., Hassan, M.R., Hassan, M.M., 2024.
Leveraging Deep Q-Learning to maximize consumer quality of experience in smart
grid. Energy 290, 130165. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.130165.
5783
J. Powell et al.
Rizzetti, T.A., Wessel, P., Rodrigues, A.S., Menezes Da Silva, B., Milbradt, R.,
Canha, L.N., 2015. Cyber security and communications network on SCADA systems
in the context of smart grids. In: 2015 50th International Universities Power
Engineering Conference. UPEC, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/UPEC.2015.
7339762.
Romero, M., Guédria, W., Panetto, H., Barafort, B., 2020. Towards a characterisation
of smart systems: A systematic literature review. Comput. Ind. 120, 103224.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103224.
Romero Aquino, M., 2021. A Smart Assessment of Business Processes for Enterprises
Decision Support (Ph.D. thesis). University of Lorraine.
Saadatmand, M., Ramezy, B., Mozafari, B., 2017. Review of communication technolo-
gies for smart grid applications. In: The National Conference on New Approaches
in Power Industry. pp. 1–10.
Salkuti, S.R., 2020. Challenges, issues and opportunities for the development of smart
grid. Int. J. Electr. Comput. Eng. (IJECE) 10 (2), 1179–1186. http://dx.doi.org/10.
11591/ijece.v10i2.pp1179-1186.
Samineni, S., Johnson, B., Hess, H., Law, J., 2006. Modeling and analysis of a flywheel
energy storage system for Voltage sag correction. IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 42 (1),
42–52. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIA.2005.861366.
Sanjab, A., Saad, W., Guvenc, I., Sarwat, A., Biswas, S., 2016. Smart grid security:
Threats, challenges, and solutions. arXiv:1606.06992.
Saxena, N., Choi, B.J., Lu, R., 2016. Authentication and authorization scheme for
various user roles and devices in smart grid. IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 11
(5), 907–921. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIFS.2015.2512525.
Schuba, C., Krsul, I., Kuhn, M., Spafford, E., Sundaram, A., Zamboni, D., 1997. Analysis
of a denial of service attack on TCP. In: Proceedings. 1997 IEEE Symposium
on Security and Privacy (Cat. No.97CB36097). pp. 208–223. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/SECPRI.1997.601338.
Shadare, A.E., Sadiku, M.N., Musa, S.M., 2017. Electromagnetic compatibility issues in
critical smart grid infrastructure. IEEE Electromagn. Compat. Mag. 6 (4), 63–70.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MEMC.0.8272283.
Shafiullah, G.M., Oo, A.M.T., Jarvis, D., Ali, A.B.M.S., Wolfs, P., 2010. Potential
challenges: Integrating renewable energy with the smart grid. In: 2010 20th
Australasian Universities Power Engineering Conference. pp. 1–6.
Shahinzadeh, H., Mirhedayati, A.-s., Shaneh, M., Nafisi, H., Gharehpetian, G.B.,
Moradi, J., 2020. Role of joint 5G-IoT framework for smart grid interoperability
enhancement. In: 2020 15th International Conference on Protection and Automa-
tion of Power Systems. IPAPS, pp. 12–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IPAPS52181.
2020.9375539.
Shapsough, S., Qatan, F., Aburukba, R., Aloul, F., Al Ali, A.R., 2015. Smart grid cyber
security: Challenges and solutions. In: 2015 International Conference on Smart Grid
and Clean Energy Technologies. ICSGCE, pp. 170–175. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ICSGCE.2015.7454291.
Shi, L., Crow, M.L., 2008. Comparison of ultracapacitor electric circuit models. In:
2008 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting - Conversion and Delivery
of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century. pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/PES.
2008.4596576.
Shi, H., Xie, L., Peng, L., 2021. Detection of false data injection attacks in smart grid
based on a new dimensionality-reduction method. Comput. Electr. Eng. 91, 107058.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2021.107058.
Song, E.Y., FitzPatrick, G.J., Lee, K.B., 2017a. Smart sensors and standard-based
interoperability in smart grids. IEEE Sens. J. 17 (23), 7723–7730. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/JSEN.2017.2729893.
Song, E.Y., FitzPatrick, G.J., Lee, K.B., Gopstein, A.M., Boynton, P.A., 2018. Inter-
operability testbed for smart sensors in smart grids. In: 2018 IEEE Power &
Energy Society Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference. ISGT, pp. 1–5.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISGT.2018.8403332.
Song, E.Y., FitzPatrick, G.J., Lee, K.B., Griffor, E., 2022. A methodology for modeling
interoperability of smart sensors in smart grids. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 13 (1),
555–563. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2021.3124490.
Song, E.Y., Lee, K.B., FitzPatrick, G.J., Zhang, Y., 2017b. Interoperability test for IEC
61850-9-2 standard-based merging units. In: 2017 IEEE Power & Energy Society
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference. ISGT, pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/ISGT.2017.8086084.
Stavrou, A., Keromytis, A.D., 2005. Countering DoS attacks with stateless multipath
overlays. In: Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Computer and Commu-
nications Security. CCS ’05, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, pp. 249–259. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1102120.1102153.
Strasser, M., Popper, C., Capkun, S., Cagalj, M., 2008. Jamming-resistant key estab-
lishment using uncoordinated frequency hopping. In: 2008 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy. Sp 2008, pp. 64–78. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SP.2008.9.
Supriya, P., Nambiar, T., Charu, R., Tyagi, A., Nagadharni, V., Deepika, M., 2011.
A laboratory prototype of a smart grid based demand side management. In:
ISGT2011-India. pp. 28–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISET-India.2011.6145343.
Syed, D., Refaat, S.S., Bouhali, O., 2020. Privacy preservation of data-driven models in
smart grids using homomorphic encryption. Information 11 (7), http://dx.doi.org/
10.3390/info11070357.
Tan, K.M., Babu, T.S., Ramachandaramurthy, V.K., Kasinathan, P., Solanki, S.G.,
Raveendran, S.K., 2021. Empowering smart grid: A comprehensive review of energy
storage technology and application with renewable energy integration. J. Energy
Storage 39, 102591. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2021.102591.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Tan, S., De, D., Song, W.-Z., Yang, J., Das, S.K., 2017. Survey of security advances in
smart grid: A data driven approach. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 19 (1), 397–422.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2016.2616442.
Tian, M., Cui, M., Dong, Z., Wang, X., Yin, S., Zhao, L., 2019. Multilevel programming-
based coordinated cyber physical attacks and countermeasures in smart grid. IEEE
Access 7, 9836–9847. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2890604.
Toronto Metropolitan University Centre for Urban Energy, 2024. Schneider electric
smart grid laboratory. https://www.torontomu.ca/cue/testing/schneider-electric-
smart-grid-lab/. (Accessed 13 January 2024).
Tran, T.-T., Shin, O.-S., Lee, J.-H., 2013. Detection of replay attacks in smart
grid systems. In: 2013 International Conference on Computing, Management
and Telecommunications. ComManTel, pp. 298–302. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
ComManTel.2013.6482409.
Ugale, B.A., Soni, P., Pema, T., Patil, A., 2011. Role of cloud computing for smart grid
of India and its cyber security. In: 2011 Nirma University International Conference
on Engineering. pp. 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/NUiConE.2011.6153298.
University of Melourne Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 2024.
Smart grid lab. https://electrical.eng.unimelb.edu.au/power-energy/smart-grid-lab.
(Accessed 13 January 2024).
U.S. Department of Energy, 2024. Recovery act smart grid program. SmartGrid.gov.
URL https://www.smartgrid.gov/recovery_act/index.html.
U.S. Department of Energy, 2024a. Recovery act: Smart grid demonstration
program. https://www.smartgrid.gov/archive/recovery_act/overview/smart_grid_
demonstration_program.html. (Accessed 13 January 2024).
U.S. Department of Energy, 2024b. Recovery act: Smart grid investment grant program.
https://www.smartgrid.gov/archive/recovery_act/overview/smart_grid_investment_
grant_program. (Accessed 13 January 2024).
Uzunoglu, M., Alam, M., 2006. Dynamic modeling, design, and simulation of a
combined PEM fuel cell and ultracapacitor system for stand-alone residential
applications. IEEE Trans. Energy Convers. 21 (3), 767–775. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TEC.2006.875468.
Venayagamoorthy, G., 2009. Potentials and promises of computational intelligence for
smart grids. In: 2009 IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting. PES ’09,
pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/PES.2009.5275224.
Visser, L., Schuurmans, E., AlSkaif, T., Fidder, H., van Voorden, A., van Sark, W., 2022.
Regulation strategies for mitigating voltage fluctuations induced by photovoltaic
solar systems in an urban low voltage grid. Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. 137,
107695. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijepes.2021.107695.
Wang, W., Lu, Z., 2013. Cyber security in the smart grid: Survey and challenges.
Comput. Netw. 57, 1344–1371. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2012.12.017.
Wang, J., Niu, X., Zhang, L., Liu, Z., Huang, X., 2024. A wind speed forecasting
system for the construction of a smart grid with two-stage data processing based
on improved ELM and deep learning strategies. Expert Syst. Appl. 241, 122487.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122487.
Wasiak, I., Hanzelka, Z., 2009. Integration of distributed energy sources with electrical
power grid. Bull. Pol. Acad. Sci. Tech. Sci. 57 (4), 297–309. http://dx.doi.org/10.
2478/v10175-010-0132-1.
Worighi, I., Maach, A., Hafid, A., Hegazy, O., Van Mierlo, J., 2019. Integrating
renewable energy in smart grid system: Architecture, virtualization and analysis.
Sustain. Energy Grids Netw. 18, 100226. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.segan.2019.
100226.
World Energy Outlook, 2016. Energy and Air Pollution. Tech. rep., International Energy
Agency (IEA0), Paris, France.
Xie, L., Carvalho, P.M.S., Ferreira, L.A.F.M., Liu, J., Krogh, B.H., Popli, N., Ilić, M.D.,
2011. Wind integration in power systems: Operational challenges and possible
solutions. Proc. IEEE 99 (1), 214–232. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2010.
2070051.
Yaar, A., Perrig, A., Song, D., 2003. Pi: a path identification mechanism to defend
against DDoS attacks. In: 2003 Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2003. pp.
93–107. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SECPRI.2003.1199330.
Yan, Y., Qian, Y., Sharif, H., Tipper, D., 2012. A survey on cyber security for smart
grid communications. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 14 (4), 998–1010. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/SURV.2012.010912.00035.
Yang, Y., Littler, T., Sezer, S., McLaughlin, K., Wang, H.F., 2011. Impact of cyber-
security issues on smart grid. In: 2011 2nd IEEE PES International Conference and
Exhibition on Innovative Smart Grid Technologies. pp. 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ISGTEurope.2011.6162722.
York University Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 2024.
Smart grid research lab. https://smartgrid.eecs.yorku.ca/. (Accessed 13 January
2024).
Young, J., 2017. Smart grid technology in the developing world. Seattle Pacidic Library.
URL https://digitalcommons.spu.edu/honorsprojects/68.
Yuan, Y., Li, Z., Ren, K., 2011. Modeling load redistribution attacks in power systems.
IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2 (2), 382–390. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2011.
2123925.
Yurish, S.Y., 2010. Sensors: Smart vs. Intelligent. Sens. Transducers 114 (3),
6–I,II,III,IV,V,VI.
5784
J. Powell et al.
Energy Reports 11 (2024) 5760–5785
Zhang, Z., Gong, S., Dimitrovski, A.D., Li, H., 2013. Time synchronization attack
in smart grid: Impact and analysis. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 4 (1), 87–98. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSG.2012.2227342.
Zhang, Z., Huang, S., Chen, Y., Li, B., Mei, S., 2022. Cyber-physical coordinated risk
mitigation in smart grids based on attack-defense game. IEEE Trans. Power Syst.
37 (1), 530–542. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPWRS.2021.3091616.
Zhao, Y., Milanović, J.V., 2024. Prediction of harmonic distortion in sparsely monitored
transmission networks with renewable generation. IEEE Trans. Power Deliv. 1–13.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TPWRD.2024.3373823.
Zhou, H.J., Guo, C.X., Qin, J., 2010. Efficient application of GPRS and CDMA networks
in SCADA system. In: IEEE PES General Meeting. pp. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/PES.2010.5588206.
5785